[Amit Varma]: The playwright Neil Simon once wrote that there are two kinds of people in the world,
[Amit Varma]: the watchers and the doers, and the watchers sit around watching the doers too.
[Amit Varma]: I have always been the kind of self-tormented watcher who watches himself watching doers
[Amit Varma]: and watches himself watching himself watching, and so on down the line recursively.
[Amit Varma]: Now, that distinction of course is simplistic.
[Amit Varma]: Most of us toggle between watching and doing, and context matters.
[Amit Varma]: In the context of national affairs, for example, I am a watcher more than anything else, meri
[Amit Varma]: kya hasiyat ki main kuch karu.
[Amit Varma]: I do have the conceit that in some small way, through this podcast more than anything else,
[Amit Varma]: I am affecting a small part of the discourse, but otherwise I am irrelevant to things.
[Amit Varma]: And that irrelevance, a shared sense of irrelevance, is one reason that the dominant emotion in
[Amit Varma]: our great democracy is apathy.
[Amit Varma]: Most of us have figured that the world may go to hell, but we can't make a difference
[Amit Varma]: so why waste energy?
[Amit Varma]: This is rational.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, society progresses because some people refuse to be apathetic.
[Amit Varma]: They see what is wrong, they say what is wrong, and even more than that, they try to fix what
[Amit Varma]: is wrong.
[Amit Varma]: They are the doers who shape our future.
[Amit Varma]: And me, I'm just sitting here watching the wheels go round and round.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a remarkable Naushad Forbes, an industrialist, a scholar, a writer, a public
[Amit Varma]: intellectual, and an activist for a better India.
[Amit Varma]: Naushad has been a consulting professor at Stanford from where he got his PhD and studied
[Amit Varma]: India's economy.
[Amit Varma]: He is also the co-chairman of Forbes Marshall and has been president of the CII.
[Amit Varma]: He's been a prolific columnist as well, and recently came out with the book, The Struggle
[Amit Varma]: and the Promise, Restoring India's Potential.
[Amit Varma]: And Naushad's efforts aren't just restricted to words.
[Amit Varma]: As part of Indian industry, he's been talking to government right from the heady times when
[Amit Varma]: Manmohan Singh first became our finance minister.
[Amit Varma]: And what I liked about this book, and I loved about my conversation with him, is that Naushad's
[Amit Varma]: insights into how to fix a country come from decades of hands-on experience.
[Amit Varma]: He's grown up in the miserable 70s, lived through the emergency, felt the buoyancy of
[Amit Varma]: liberalisation, he's played the long game, and he continues to play the long game.
[Amit Varma]: I tried to capture some of the sweep of this journey in my conversation with him, and I
[Amit Varma]: think you'll enjoy it as much as I did.
[Amit Varma]: But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of Clear Writing,
[Amit Varma]: and online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clearwriting.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiancut.com slash clearwriting.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Arshad, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Great, great to be with you.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to begin by asking you a question followed by telling you how much I enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: your book.
[Amit Varma]: You know, a lot of these areas I have spoken about with previous guests thought about written
[Amit Varma]: about and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you did such a great job of putting it all together and presenting your kind of vision.
[Amit Varma]: And the one thing I was struck by is how incredibly positive you are in this.
[Amit Varma]: Like I am known in some circles as a bit of a pessimist, you know, I think our mutual
[Amit Varma]: friend Ram Guha would probably be more on my side.
[Amit Varma]: On this, I certainly believe that we are headed for a very difficult time and things will
[Amit Varma]: go down a long way before they come back up.
[Amit Varma]: But I've also speak to guests who are also very optimistic, like I had a recent episode
[Amit Varma]: with Aakar Patel, whose passport at the time had been confiscated, who's got cases against
[Amit Varma]: him everywhere, and he was full of joy and cheer and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So what makes you so positive and full of energy?
[Amit Varma]: Because you've done a great job in this book also laying out all the things that have gone
[Amit Varma]: wrong and that we haven't managed to fix.
[Amit Varma]: And they would perhaps have been reason to be positive maybe 10 years ago, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when the economy was still on an upswing and things were looking good.
[Guest]: What gives you this energy now?
[Guest]: So I'm not always positive, I should say.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, like everyone else, I have my cycles, I have my ups and downs.
[Guest]: Broadly speaking, I'm positive.
[Guest]: I'm positive about the world that I live in, and I see a world that seems, broadly speaking,
[Guest]: to be getting better with each passing year.
[Guest]: Now, as I say in the book, you know, I was consistently positive about us as a country
[Guest]: from between 1991 and 2017, and I started to get less positive in 2017 for a variety
[Guest]: of reasons, you know, for economic reasons, for social reasons, for governance reasons.
[Guest]: But I'm still broadly positive, and I'm broadly positive because we seem somehow as a society
[Guest]: to be able to sometimes, in almost a random way, and surprisingly, redeem ourselves.
[Guest]: So for example, you know, you can start getting very depressed about our institutions, about
[Guest]: an attack on institutions, about the decline of institutions, the independence of institutions
[Guest]: being in some decline, and then suddenly you'll have a chief justice of the Supreme Court
[Guest]: who will revive the institution, and will pass judgments, will hold power to account.
[Guest]: That just turns things around.
[Guest]: And that's happened so often, and sometimes at the darkest times in our history.
[Guest]: So maybe to answer your question, where does the positive element come from, it may come
[Guest]: from being older, Amit, that you know, I've seen more of those upswings and more of those
[Guest]: recoveries in our history, which encourages me that what we've seen in the past will continue
[Guest]: to happen, because there's enough going on in the country and enough people of great
[Guest]: courage like Ram Guha and Akhar Patel to draw strength from.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, that's what struck me as you were speaking as well, that you have a wider
[Amit Varma]: span of history to kind of look at.
[Amit Varma]: I was just a kid in the 70s when emergency and all happened.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, you kind of went through that period and saw that play out and we did come
[Unknown]: out of that.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Where we were literally a dictatorship for a while, but we did come out of that.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe there's that as well.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your childhood growing up and all of that, because you know,
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I've realized that I take for granted and my guests who are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: my age or older, we often take for granted is we have a picture of the world in our heads
[Amit Varma]: that's shaped by decades of living a particular life and accumulated experience.
[Amit Varma]: And our country is very young, you know, I think more than 60 70% of the country is born
[Amit Varma]: after liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's no that shared memory of what came before.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in your book, I realized that you share my fanhood of PG Woodhouse, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember at one point in my writing course, I mentioned PG Woodhouse.
[Amit Varma]: And then a couple of people later wrote to me and said, okay, who is he, you know, kind
[Amit Varma]: of makes you sit back.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm very, therefore, keen to know a little bit about your childhood, where were you born,
[Amit Varma]: where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: What was the texture of your days early on before you came into adulthood?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So I was born in Bombay, as it was then, and as I still generally call it, in 1960, grew
[Guest]: up for the first seven years of my life in in Bombay, went to kindergarten and first
[Guest]: and second standard at Cathedral School, which was at that time, they just opened, I think
[Guest]: with my year, a new branch in Malabar Hill.
[Guest]: So it was a very, it was a very comfortable, comfortable childhood.
[Guest]: My father set up a factory in Pune around 1960, around the time I was born.
[Guest]: And he started going down so that even though the office of the company was in Bombay, he
[Guest]: would go down every week and spend the week in Pune, so he'd go down on Monday morning
[Guest]: and come back on Thursday evening and then work in Bombay on Friday and Saturday.
[Guest]: And as we started growing up, my elder brother and I, we started spending more time in Pune
[Guest]: because we would go down instead of him coming to Bombay for weekends, we would go to Pune
[Guest]: for weekends because they'd rented this really nice house.
[Guest]: And we would go down for the weekend.
[Guest]: And then my parents bought that house in Pune, which is still the house where my father and
[Guest]: my brother and his family live.
[Guest]: And we would go down for weekends and enjoyed Pune so much that in 1967, we moved to Pune.
[Guest]: And then from 67 through to 77, when I went to the US as an undergraduate, I grew up in
[Guest]: Pune and went to school in Pune and still love it.
[Guest]: I mean, I still think it's a great city.
[Guest]: I think it's a very nice city to live in from a climate perspective.
[Guest]: It's a very good city to live in also from, I think, an intellectual perspective.
[Guest]: And it's getting to be a better city to live in from a sort of social and restaurant perspective.
[Guest]: It used to be somewhat parochial on that vector, but it's getting better.
[Guest]: Which school did you go to?
[Guest]: To Bishop's.
[Amit Varma]: I went to Bishop's.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, very good.
[Guest]: So I went to Bishop's from the third to the 10th standard.
[Guest]: And then Bishop's didn't have an 11th and 12th at that time.
[Guest]: So I went to St. Vincent's for the 11th and then didn't actually do my 12th, went to the
[Guest]: US and went to a small junior college called Menlo for my first year when I was 17.
[Guest]: And yes, so I have a memory of the emergency from 1975 to 77.
[Guest]: I remember my parents talking about it.
[Guest]: And I remember also that we used to always be very free talking about anything at home,
[Guest]: being critical of the government and so on.
[Guest]: None of us were fans of Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: And I remember that my parents, when they would talk about the government and Indira
[Guest]: Gandhi during the emergency, they would go outside and walk on the lawn and not talk
[Guest]: in the house because there was this concern that maybe people were watching or listening
[Guest]: in somehow.
[Guest]: And I remember that.
[Guest]: And that was my first exposure, really, to a kind of surveillance state, if you like.
[Guest]: I don't think there's any evidence that anyone had any interest in what my parents were saying
[Guest]: to each other or any of us were saying at home.
[Guest]: But I do remember that that's what they did.
[Guest]: I remember a second thing, that there were these, I think there were 10 principles or
[Guest]: something that was put out by the government of the day during the emergency.
[Guest]: And these were 10 things that you were supposed to do and follow.
[Guest]: And it was sent to all companies.
[Guest]: And my father used to, at that time, look at all the mail that was coming into the company.
[Guest]: And when this came in, he tore it up and threw it away.
[Guest]: And then there was a follow-up where they said, well, what about this?
[Guest]: And everyone in the company, quite honestly, were able to say, we don't know anything about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So they sent it again, and he tore it up and threw it away again.
[Guest]: And the same thing went on.
[Guest]: And finally, I know we sort of outlived the emergency.
[Guest]: And fortunately, we were a small company, and so no one really cared what we did.
[Amit Varma]: Just speaking of the surveillance state, before we started, we were talking about state capacity.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the contexts in which I'm really glad that India's state capacity is so poor
[Amit Varma]: is the malign nature of the state sometimes, that sure, we might have a surveillance state
[Amit Varma]: and sure, the state might want to crack down on society and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But it is so incredibly incompetent.
[Amit Varma]: So you know.
[Guest]: I agree.
[Guest]: I think it's a great strength.
[Guest]: And my best example, when I was an undergraduate, I studied industrial engineering and history.
[Guest]: The history that I studied was modern Europe.
[Guest]: And I remember taking courses in the history of modern Europe at the time.
[Guest]: And I remember the contrast between how fascism rolled out in Germany, Italy, and Spain.
[Guest]: And it sort of cascaded down in terms of competence and also in terms of virulence.
[Guest]: And the competence and virulence went hand in hand in the sense that Germany was the
[Guest]: most virulent because they were the most competent.
[Guest]: Italy, you know, there were some loose ends and so on.
[Guest]: And therefore, fascism in Italy was not as virulent as it was in Germany.
[Guest]: And Spain was even less virulent.
[Guest]: And it was directly connected with state capacity.
[Guest]: And ever since then, I've been a great fan of weak state capacity.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: One wouldn't know it reading your book necessarily.
[Amit Varma]: In those early days, you know, as you're kind of growing up, what is your conception of
[Amit Varma]: India at that time?
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's a cliched phrase, idea of India, whatever, like, I look back to my growing
[Amit Varma]: up in the 70s, 80s, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a certain sense of India.
[Amit Varma]: But gradually, as I interact with the real world, layers begin to fall off.
[Amit Varma]: And gradually, as I begin to interact with the real world and get into adulthood, liberalization
[Amit Varma]: also changes India.
[Amit Varma]: So it's constantly evolving.
[Amit Varma]: And in recent years, I would argue that I have realized that there were certain things
[Amit Varma]: about which I had blinkers even back then that I didn't really realize because I was
[Amit Varma]: in this elite English speaking bubble of my own, where some things were unseen to me,
[Amit Varma]: you know, to go with the title of this show.
[Amit Varma]: So how did your view of India evolve?
[Amit Varma]: Like one, what what was it while growing up to how is it then when you're looking at it
[Amit Varma]: from outside when you go to Stanford, and like you said, you spend many, many years,
[Amit Varma]: more than many of the people who were teaching you by the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: And then you come back, how did your view kind of evolve?
[Guest]: So you know, when I was when I was growing up, I mean, your comment about living in a
[Guest]: bubble was completely applicable to me.
[Guest]: I mean, I lived in this very comfortable, affluent, very privileged bubble.
[Guest]: And I was very aware that there was a lot of poverty around us.
[Guest]: And very aware, not only that there was poverty around us, and I'm not talking here.
[Guest]: Now about, you know, just people who were destitute, but there was and there was a lot
[Guest]: of that around, certainly in the in the 70s, 60s, 70s, there was a huge amount of that
[Guest]: around, right.
[Guest]: But also, that people who were middle class in India, lived a very frugal life.
[Guest]: That only started to change post 1991.
[Guest]: You know, people who lived who were middle class in India, did not take, did not forget
[Guest]: did not take holidays abroad, did not take holidays necessarily, they, you know, there
[Guest]: was not enough of a surplus to be able to afford holidays anywhere.
[Guest]: You know, when you went around and visited our tourist monuments, you saw more foreigners
[Guest]: than Indians.
[Guest]: And it was simply because Indians couldn't afford to be tourists in our own country.
[Guest]: You know, second, if you looked at possessions, and you know, the cars, cars were a luxury
[Guest]: good.
[Guest]: And even for the middle class were a luxury good, you know, you instead needed to buy
[Guest]: a scooter, which you needed to wait whatever 10 years to get.
[Guest]: There was a scarcity mindset, you know, because everything was, and of course, the government
[Guest]: tried to deal with scarcity by controls and made the scarcity worse, for example, in the
[Guest]: case of cement, where cement and the supply of cement was rationed.
[Guest]: And the moment they opened it up, suddenly cement became available and the price fell.
[Guest]: And so there were many of these sort of experiences growing up, that I think, taught me things
[Guest]: about the life I lived.
[Guest]: But I'd say it was only after I went to the US and went to Stanford and started really
[Guest]: studying, not India, because Stanford had no courses on India at that time, they had
[Guest]: no one who had, I mean, you know, you had to really search to find anyone who had any
[Guest]: knowledge and any interest even, in India, unfortunately, at the time.
[Guest]: But I got really interested in India when I was at Stanford.
[Guest]: And because I started getting more and more into issues relating to development, more
[Guest]: and more into issues relating to history, apart from engineering, and it was, I'd say,
[Guest]: I would credit my education at Stanford with my interest in India and development that
[Guest]: became a much more, then became very much of a life's passion.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the way sometimes distance can give you that important perspective, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's like that, I forget the exact way the dialogue proceeds, but there is this dialogue
[Amit Varma]: where there's a fish in water, daddy fish and son fish are going along, and another
[Amit Varma]: creature passes by and asks him what the water is like today and daddy fish says, it's okay.
[Amit Varma]: And baby fish turns around and says, what's water, right?
[Guest]: So a little bit like that.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking of like, I had an episode on the liberalization of 91 and what life was
[Amit Varma]: like before it with Ajay Shah and Shruti Rajgopalan, so I linked that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting, you mentioned cars like one of the things that would, you know, surprise
[Amit Varma]: people to know who haven't experienced it themselves, that, you know, secondhand cars
[Amit Varma]: were more expensive than new cars, because a new car had that waiting period of eight
[Amit Varma]: years where you could, you know, secondhand car, you could get immediately, my God, what
[Guest]: a premium.
[Guest]: You know, I remember that time that, you know, the choice was, you had the Ambassador, you
[Guest]: had the Fiat, right, and then for a period of time, you had the Standard Herald, I mean,
[Guest]: and then they stopped manufacturing.
[Guest]: So you had these two, pre-Maruti days, yeah?
[Guest]: And then you had the State Trading Corporation.
[Guest]: And this, a classic Soviet institution, if there ever was one, right, where, what was
[Guest]: the State Trading Corporation?
[Guest]: The State Trading Corporation was this government body that would take over the cars that were
[Guest]: brought into India by diplomats and would sell them to wealthy Indians and where you
[Guest]: had to bid for them.
[Guest]: And I remember we bought a car from the State Trading Corporation, which was, we bought
[Guest]: an Australian Chrysler, which must have been, I don't know, six or seven years old.
[Guest]: And I think we paid, I can't remember what for it, now, 10,000 rupees, something like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: But this is in the 70s.
[Guest]: And I mean, it was a good car, but it was eight, 10 years out of date.
[Guest]: And that's what we experienced as a country until 1991, when things started to change.
[Guest]: So I think you're exactly right.
[Guest]: I think people do not, who are born post-liberalization, take it all for granted.
[Guest]: And they take for granted that the way we are is the way we've always been.
[Guest]: And second, that there isn't a huge danger in going back to that pre-1991 era.
[Guest]: That's the part that bothers me.
[Guest]: I don't mind if people take for granted that this is the way we are, because that's the
[Guest]: only thing that they know.
[Guest]: But I think we really underestimate, as a result, the dangers of going back to a control
[Guest]: regime, a regime where bureaucrats decide what should be made, what prices should prevail,
[Guest]: how much of what should be made.
[Guest]: That discretion, that bureaucratic discretion is something we left behind.
[Guest]: And it changed India.
[Guest]: And we should not go back to that kind of an era.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll digress here and we'll kind of move away from biography and tackle something that
[Amit Varma]: you devote a subject to in your book, which is culture.
[Amit Varma]: And you call it a ramble in your book, but I found it a fascinating subject.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a question for that, triggered by the phrase that you just used, scarcity
[Amit Varma]: mindset.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I remember reading long back, I think it was Jagdish Bhagwati who wrote it in the
[Amit Varma]: context of India and China, that people in China have a profit-seeking mindset, people
[Amit Varma]: in India have a rent-seeking mindset.
[Amit Varma]: And when I sort of thought about that, and the idea there being that in India, there
[Amit Varma]: is this thing in the culture, you're always looking out for the next buckra, you're always
[Amit Varma]: trying to exploit somebody, you're always looking at it as a zero-sum game, almost as
[Amit Varma]: if it's a scarcity mindset.
[Amit Varma]: And I know people who will go into business also with that kind of approach, less and
[Amit Varma]: less so now, but it's almost kind of intuitive.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I can't speak to whether he was right about China or not, because obviously, I don't
[Guest]: know about China.
[Guest]: Yeah, I wouldn't, I wouldn't agree with the, you know, with the that China somehow was
[Amit Varma]: much more profit-seeking.
[Amit Varma]: But coming back to the question of India, you know, in your chapter on culture, of course,
[Amit Varma]: a broad point that you're making there is that whatever policies you design, however
[Amit Varma]: you design your institutions or your state or whatever, has to take into account local
[Amit Varma]: culture.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I agree with I've had episodes on you know, what is called isomorphic mimicry
[Amit Varma]: and how it can't really work, you can't transplant a policy from somewhere else and put it here.
[Amit Varma]: But also, it seems to me that the relationship works both ways that sometimes elements of
[Amit Varma]: our culture can also be shaped by a system of governance that has been put in place.
[Amit Varma]: Like I would imagine that growing up in the 60s or 70s for a common person, that scarcity
[Amit Varma]: mindset would mean that, you know, one, there was so much scarcity that you often, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you got something that obviously meant somebody else did not positive, some games
[Amit Varma]: were few.
[Amit Varma]: Secondly, the state was so all powerful, that everybody aspired to be part of the state,
[Amit Varma]: so they could use the power of the state in some way or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the term rent-seeking mindset, you know, to kind of get by and therefore,
[Amit Varma]: because of our institutions and the system of governance that was set in place, we developed
[Amit Varma]: this mindset, which now seems like a cultural thing.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not saying necessarily the causation is always one where there's always an interplay.
[Amit Varma]: But it strikes me that that could be something that's reinforced this aspect of our culture.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I have no idea if we had this mindset, say 200 years ago, or how colonialism may
[Amit Varma]: have played into it.
[Amit Varma]: But I certainly see this mindset pervading even today, like I was a professional poker
[Amit Varma]: player for five years, and game of skill, and all of that, but also on the intersection
[Amit Varma]: of skill and gambling.
[Amit Varma]: So but that's a whole different sort of tangent.
[Guest]: My grandfather in the 30s supported himself and his family in some style on his bridge
[Guest]: weddings.
[Amit Varma]: Magnificent.
[Amit Varma]: There you go.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So you know where I'm coming from.
[Amit Varma]: And even there in that community, I met so many people who would be, I'll do this venture
[Amit Varma]: and I'll do that venture.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously, poker is a zero sum game, if not a negative sum game.
[Amit Varma]: So you expect that mentality there.
[Amit Varma]: But that mentality was just so common at the time, like, thankfully, in our new economy,
[Amit Varma]: it's not so much the case, because you have young entrepreneurs coming up with, you know,
[Amit Varma]: who are genuinely, you know, driven by much more than that.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of that, that, like, one, I'd like you to elaborate on what you
[Amit Varma]: think are specific aspects of our culture that we need to keep in mind, when we think
[Amit Varma]: about policy, or when we think about the relationship between state and society?
[Amit Varma]: And two, would you agree with this example?
[Amit Varma]: And because when we talk of culture, it is we, the danger is of essentialism, that we
[Amit Varma]: assume that, oh, this is an inherent, immutable quality of a people, and therefore, this is
[Amit Varma]: how they are.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that that's not necessarily the case.
[Guest]: So let me start with the last comment that you made, and I fully agree.
[Guest]: And I give some examples in the chapter also of how culture has changed, and changed very
[Guest]: dramatically in different countries.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, we talked about Germany and fascism earlier on.
[Guest]: And Germany today, if you ask me in Europe, is probably the least right wing fascist oriented
[Guest]: country.
[Guest]: You know, it's a society that works, it's a society that believes in carrying everyone
[Guest]: along with it.
[Guest]: It's the society that Angela Merkel opened up most to immigration, you know, and immigration
[Guest]: not from other parts of Europe, but immigration from Africa.
[Guest]: So cultures change, and there are lots of other examples in there.
[Guest]: But culture, it seems to me, is a product of our history, so very much so.
[Guest]: It's also, and the history in a sense is a product of the policies that you follow, and
[Guest]: it's affected by it.
[Guest]: So the scarcity mindset, I think, is very much a part of our cultural heritage.
[Guest]: And it shows up even today in different ways.
[Guest]: It shows up in sort of, well, this is good enough for us.
[Guest]: So you don't need the absolute best, you make do.
[Guest]: And that make do mindset is damaging.
[Guest]: If you want to win in the world, you can't make do, you have to be the best.
[Guest]: So it's not that this is all pervading, but it is a theme.
[Guest]: It appears too often, because it's a part of our lived experience, it seems to me.
[Guest]: You know, there is this scarcity, there is it.
[Guest]: And the scarcity, I think, comes from poverty.
[Guest]: It comes from being relatively poor.
[Guest]: And as we get richer as a country and as a society, and as that wealth spreads through
[Guest]: to more people, I think that is waning, but that mindset is still very much there.
[Guest]: You have to remind me, the first question.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I do this sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: The first part of the question was that, you know, what aspects of our culture do you think
[Guest]: are germane to how we should think about policy in the state and so on?
[Guest]: The starting point for me, it seems to me, is our huge diversity and pluralism.
[Guest]: The fact that we're, I think we're the world's most diverse country.
[Guest]: Now, we have a huge advantage in that we are also the world's largest country in population
[Guest]: together with China.
[Guest]: But China is much less diverse than we are.
[Guest]: And there's a reason why, I think.
[Guest]: I think the reason China is so much less diverse, I'm no specialist in Chinese history, but
[Guest]: it seems to me that the reason that China is so much less diverse is, number one, because
[Guest]: of a very strong, centuries-long controlling state and powerful state administrative mechanism
[Guest]: in terms of sort of Mandarin rule and so on, the use of Mandarin as a language and so on.
[Guest]: And second, which people, I think, don't point out and don't give enough credence to, the
[Guest]: devastating experience of the Cultural Revolution, and I think the decades of the Cultural Revolution
[Guest]: that visited real horrors on the population.
[Guest]: And these were common horrors.
[Guest]: These were horrors that the average Chinese experienced and the elites experienced together.
[Guest]: Dozens of millions of people are supposed to have starved because of the follies of
[Guest]: the Cultural Revolution.
[Guest]: And I think that lived experience, I think, churned the society so dramatically that it
[Guest]: ended up producing a much more homogeneous country.
[Guest]: All I can say is that I'm really happy that India has not had to go through that same
[Guest]: kind of tortuous experience to have that common homogeneous perspective and view of the world.
[Guest]: Now, would we be better off as a country that's more homogeneous?
[Guest]: Well, I don't think that's a question that I would, you know, I would say, given what
[Guest]: it would take to be more homogeneous, for a country of 1.4 billion people to be more
[Guest]: homogeneous, I don't want to be more homogeneous.
[Guest]: I think we should instead say, we're the world's most diverse country.
[Guest]: Given that we're the world's most diverse country, how can we make policies work?
[Guest]: Combine that heterogeneity in the country with the fact that we have low state capacity,
[Guest]: and I'm sure we'll talk about that later and so on.
[Guest]: And if you put those two things together, then it says to me that we should look to
[Guest]: the state to do a few things, to do them well, and to leave the rest to private initiative.
[Guest]: And private initiative doesn't mean only the private sector.
[Guest]: It means the private sector, it means NGOs, it means citizens who get up and want to do
[Guest]: a particular thing and take care of something in their community or get together with others
[Guest]: and address vaccine shortages or whatever the issue of the day is.
[Guest]: So I really feel that as a country, we should seek a limited state, a state that is effective
[Guest]: in doing a few things, and then rely on private initiative for the great bulk of everything
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: So that's the first piece, this diversity piece.
[Guest]: The second element of our culture, it seems to me, and this is something that is an experience
[Guest]: of the past 30 years, we've started to develop a culture of growth.
[Guest]: And there's a section on a culture of growth, as you know.
[Guest]: And that's a very positive thing.
[Guest]: Until 1991, if you ever talked about growth rates in India, you'd always get a response
[Guest]: where, oh yeah, but India's different, we're so big, then China was growing really fast
[Guest]: and equally big, bigger at that time.
[Guest]: So how come?
[Guest]: And then you'd say, well, but you'd have a whole list of excuses.
[Guest]: You'd have the size thing.
[Guest]: Earlier, you used to have the colonial thing, that blame colonialism for everything.
[Guest]: And I blame colonialism for a lot of things, and a lot of things that kept us poor for
[Guest]: centuries.
[Guest]: But if you blame colonialism for everything, then you're not taking agency for where we
[Guest]: are now.
[Guest]: And you're not saying, hey, we can do something about this.
[Guest]: You can't just say, well, because we were once a colony, and we were a colony for so
[Guest]: many centuries, for two centuries, that that somehow is going to blight our prospects forever.
[Guest]: No, it's not.
[Guest]: Other countries have moved ahead after a colonial legacy.
[Guest]: We can too.
[Guest]: And we've demonstrated since 1991 that we can.
[Guest]: So I think we've developed this culture of growth.
[Guest]: That culture of growth shows up in a bunch of different ways.
[Guest]: One of the ways is that it started showing up where people started seeing a fall in the
[Guest]: rate of growth as something that was a failure of government.
[Guest]: Very positive, very good thing, very good, very good development.
[Guest]: Because then people start saying, how come, why we were growing at 9%, we were growing
[Guest]: at 8%, why are we now only growing at 4% or 5%?
[Guest]: And even if the government of the day tries to rationalize it, and explain, and say why,
[Guest]: and so on, and maybe even change the figures so that it doesn't show that, you still, I
[Guest]: think, have this sense that we deserve to grow at this rate, at this much higher rate
[Guest]: at 7%, 8%, 9%.
[Guest]: I agree that we deserve to grow at that rate, but I don't think we can count on it.
[Guest]: You have to keep working at it.
[Guest]: And I think how you work at it is the important question.
[Guest]: And there's lots on the book in that, how we work at growing at much more rapid rates
[Guest]: of growth.
[Guest]: But I think this culture of growth is an important element.
[Guest]: It's something we're starting to have, at least among the urban inhabitants of the country,
[Guest]: probably reasonably extensively among the middle class.
[Guest]: So two, three, four, 400 million people now.
[Guest]: And I think this idea of progress is starting to show up for more and more people.
[Guest]: And that's a very powerful idea and something that we need to keep enhancing and believing.
[Guest]: So that's the second piece, the culture of growth.
[Guest]: Third is, there's a real, I think, if I had to pick a common piece, Indian parents are
[Guest]: hugely indulgent.
[Guest]: They make tremendous sacrifices for their children.
[Guest]: How you capture that and show that as culture, I don't know.
[Guest]: But I think it's a very important feature because it's very valuable.
[Guest]: It means that Indian parents are willing to make sacrifices to invest in education for
[Guest]: their kids to ensure that they are, you know, yeah, we can do a better job, especially of
[Guest]: parity between boys and girls than we do.
[Guest]: But there's at least this desire to educate and to ensure that the next generation has
[Guest]: a better life than the current generation, again, a very powerful element of our culture.
[Guest]: It's not unique.
[Guest]: Other cultures also, some other cultures also have this.
[Guest]: But if I compare where we are at our time in history with the West and with many countries
[Guest]: in the West, with the US, for example, or with the UK even, I think we're in better
[Guest]: shape because of this element in our culture of parents willing to make sacrifices of close
[Guest]: families of children, then having a sense of obligation and a sense of responsibility
[Guest]: to look after their parents when they get older.
[Guest]: I think these are all very healthy, healthy elements of how we operate as a society.
[Guest]: And then a last piece on our culture, I think we have a culture of entrepreneurship.
[Guest]: You know, I give this example in the book, the story about this photographer at the Amber
[Guest]: Fort who takes pictures of this group of tourists that I was with when they ride the elephant
[Guest]: up the fort and then, you know, the negotiation over photographs.
[Guest]: And it's an illustration of the most surprising display of enterprise and resourcefulness
[Guest]: from individuals who you would not expect to.
[Guest]: These are not people who've had the benefit of great education.
[Guest]: They're not people who have any privileges.
[Guest]: And they demonstrate an ability to really be entrepreneurs.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a fantastic summary, I'll think aloud on each of those points, on these points
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned, because there's so much to kind of untangle.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, you know, that illustration you gave of Indians have this approach that
[Amit Varma]: we'll make do, you know, we'll satisfy as economists might call it, is again, something
[Amit Varma]: that one can see, you know, might have been affected by policy as well.
[Amit Varma]: Like in your book, you speak about how we should always have been more open, right?
[Amit Varma]: And our manufacturers, for example, have been protected for so long with tariffs and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: And one point that you have made, I mean, it's a common point that I keep making that
[Amit Varma]: if you are just open, you know, consumers will benefit the most.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, when you put tariffs, you're really redistributing wealth from poor citizens to
[Amit Varma]: richer firms.
[Amit Varma]: But the other point that you emphasized on in your book is that the way that a firm achieves
[Amit Varma]: excellence is if it has to compete with the rest of the world, if it's not protected in
[Amit Varma]: any way.
[Amit Varma]: So perhaps this mentality of, ah, this is good enough, chalta hai, you know, might kind
[Amit Varma]: of come from there.
[Amit Varma]: The diversity point is what I love about India.
[Amit Varma]: Like if I love this country, the first thing that really comes to mind is that we contain
[Amit Varma]: so many multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And I was reminded of this quote, but it's in a completely different context, not a celebration
[Amit Varma]: of David Reich.
[Amit Varma]: And I got this from Tony Joseph's book, Early Indians.
[Amit Varma]: And David Reich had done a similar genetic study of different populations and pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that while the Han Chinese are one large population, India is actually a collection
[Amit Varma]: of many small populations.
[Amit Varma]: And his point was that is because of endogamy.
[Amit Varma]: So it's because of caste, which is, of course, you know, one of the greatest barriers that
[Amit Varma]: we still have to overcome, sadly, that was a negative way of looking at it.
[Amit Varma]: But if you want to interpret it, if you want to talk about it in another way, it is true
[Amit Varma]: that we are many peoples, we are not just one people.
[Amit Varma]: So that's quite fantastic.
[Guest]: You see it.
[Guest]: You know, you see it.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, you know, you travel from the northeast to the south, to the north,
[Guest]: to the west.
[Guest]: I mean, we look different.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, we come in different heights, you know, it's, you know, we have different, different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of hair, you know, it's, it's, it's great.
[Amit Varma]: No, you mentioned you come in different heights, a slight aside, you know, when I came to Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I noticed, I came to Bombay in the mid 90s, and I would travel by local
[Amit Varma]: train everywhere, obviously.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I noticed is that people who traveled first class, with a first
[Amit Varma]: class pass, like me, were on average taller than people who travel second class.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And that's heartbreaking, because it's a visual illustration of poverty, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, one of this, you know, there's, when you go around and visit homes, you know,
[Guest]: old homes in in England, you know, you go into these old cottages from the 16th and
[Guest]: 15th century, what's the most striking thing?
[Guest]: The most striking thing is that the doorways are very, very low.
[Guest]: And that's because people were so much shorter than and it's they were so much shorter than
[Guest]: because nutrition levels were so much worse than.
[Guest]: So it's a sign of progress, that, that we're getting taller.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And, and the fact that, you know, people in first class are taller than people in second
[Guest]: class is indeed very damning.
[Amit Varma]: This was true in the 90s.
[Amit Varma]: I would hope the difference is less narrowing.
[Guest]: I don't know, we are still such a desperately poor country.
[Amit Varma]: The other aspect actually plays to that, like you spoke about growth.
[Amit Varma]: And I can agree with you that it's important that we're thinking about all this.
[Amit Varma]: But I think that there might be a mistake that we are, you know, the selection biases
[Amit Varma]: at play that we're looking at the people around us and the people that we have access to.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you look at the way people vote, for example, growth is far from their mind,
[Amit Varma]: you know, demonetization happened, it devastated, especially the informal economy.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, that thumping election win in UP didn't seem to affect the BJP at all.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they won easily.
[Amit Varma]: I like, I recorded an episode a few days back with a couple of economists, Shrayana Bhattacharya
[Amit Varma]: and Rajeshwari Sengupta, and we were talking about how important the role of welfare delivery
[Amit Varma]: has played in votes, both in 2019.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, recently, and it's true that welfare and growth can happen together, can,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you can make a package out of it, and so on, as Shrayana was eloquently arguing.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, we are ignoring growth completely in that category of discourse.
[Amit Varma]: Typically, when, you know, farmers will demand things from the government, they will demand
[Amit Varma]: things like farm loan waivers, which are perhaps a necessary anesthetic, but don't solve any
[Guest]: of the fundamental structural problems, right?
[Guest]: You're absolutely right.
[Guest]: I think the, I mean, I should, I should actually, maybe I should put culture of growth in the
[Guest]: category of desired, desired cultural attribute, as opposed to cultural attribute we have now.
[Guest]: It's just that we have much more of it than we ever had, thanks to the experience since
[Guest]: the 90s.
[Guest]: So thanks to the last 30 years, we're starting at least in some sections, significant sections
[Amit Varma]: of population.
[Amit Varma]: There's a directionality.
[Guest]: I think that there's a directionality of developing that culture of growth.
[Guest]: The problem is that, and it's, this is a problem of economics, and it's a problem of economists.
[Guest]: We do not, as a group, do a good job of tying growth rates to individual well-being.
[Guest]: We do it, actually, a lousy job.
[Guest]: You know, we could much more clearly relate national growth to growth of states and companies
[Guest]: and small enterprises to individual well-being and salaries.
[Guest]: We need to draw those connections because they are directly connected.
[Guest]: And we don't do a good job of drawing those connections.
[Guest]: We don't do a good job anywhere in the world, by the way.
[Guest]: But in a country like ours that has decades of development to aspire for and look forward
[Guest]: to, we have to do, we have to draw those connections.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember, you know, my friend Nitin Pai of Dakshashila once estimated that for
[Amit Varma]: every 1% rise in the GDP, 2 million people come out of poverty, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore growth has a moral force.
[Amit Varma]: It is not just a number somewhere, exports are this, imports are that.
[Amit Varma]: No, growth has a moral force.
[Amit Varma]: It changes the lives of people.
[Amit Varma]: Which is why, you know, when I think of all these wasted decades with millions of people
[Amit Varma]: in poverty, you know, it's a moral catastrophe.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And, you know, when we were growing, you know, very, very poorly, very little in the 70s,
[Guest]: we almost tried to make a virtue of it.
[Guest]: You know, we, you, I mean, you would hear statements from the prime minister at the
[Guest]: time from Indira Gandhi and from political leaders at the time, you know, almost sort
[Guest]: of rationalizing it and saying that, well, you know, yes, we're growing very little,
[Guest]: but, you know, we're so much more equal and so on.
[Guest]: We were, we were a pretty, you know, we had a very good GD coefficient of inequality,
[Guest]: but that was because almost everyone in the country was poor, not because, you know, we
[Guest]: weren't in, we were, we, the official, the official statistics showed that we were much
[Guest]: more equal at the time, but that wasn't a good thing.
[Guest]: It was, it was a bad thing.
[Guest]: It reflected a country that was almost entirely poor.
[Amit Varma]: No, one of my pet bugbears, in fact, is how people nowadays are following the fashion
[Amit Varma]: of the times.
[Amit Varma]: We'll use the word inequality when what they mean is poverty.
[Amit Varma]: We should all be outraged at poverty, but inequality is very different.
[Amit Varma]: And because people look at the world in a zero somewhere, they assume if the rich are
[Amit Varma]: getting richer, the poor must be getting poorer.
[Guest]: And you know, I think what we, what we should do from an inequality perspective is we should
[Guest]: say, how are the bottom 20% of the population doing and how are the next 20% doing?
[Guest]: And if they're getting better off, hey, great, that's the goal, that's the objective of development,
[Guest]: you know, that the population as a whole move up.
[Guest]: And if in the process we become less equal, that's okay.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, in fact, since liberalization, we've reduced poverty and inequality has gone up
[Amit Varma]: because while the rich are getting richer, the poor are also getting richer, but at a
[Amit Varma]: slower rate.
[Amit Varma]: That's bound to happen.
[Amit Varma]: But poverty is going.
[Amit Varma]: So like the phrase I love that really sums up my feelings on this are by the philosopher
[Amit Varma]: Harry Frankfurt, who wrote this book called On Inequality.
[Amit Varma]: And the phrase was the doctrine of sufficiency.
[Amit Varma]: He said that what we should have a doctrine of sufficiency in that however we define sufficiency,
[Amit Varma]: we should just aim at that to make sure that everybody reaches that level above the poverty
[Amit Varma]: line or some line below it doesn't matter where you define it.
[Amit Varma]: But you look at getting, you know, getting rid of poverty first.
[Amit Varma]: So anyway, that that's a pet bugbear.
[Amit Varma]: And to illustrate this, you know, a lovely paragraph by you, I'll read out which sort
[Amit Varma]: of gives, you know, this pretty in one para goes through this long sweep of history where
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, 500 years ago, the world was a pretty equal place.
[Amit Varma]: Every country was poor, and the richest country had around twice the per capita GDP of the
[Amit Varma]: poorest.
[Amit Varma]: By 1800, the richest country was around five times as rich as the poorest.
[Amit Varma]: By 2020, the richest country, Switzerland, Norway, were 300 times richer than the poorest
[Amit Varma]: Niger, Malawi.
[Amit Varma]: When some of our present day nationalists talk of reclaiming some bygone golden age
[Amit Varma]: of Indian history, they are mistaken.
[Amit Varma]: There was glory if you were the ruler or near him almost always him and not her.
[Amit Varma]: For an ordinary person in every country, life was solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short.
[Amit Varma]: There is only one reason India accounted for a much larger share of world GDP 500 years
[Amit Varma]: ago than now.
[Amit Varma]: Every country was poor, and we had many more poor people, a stop code.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I'll come back to our historical development through the years shortly.
[Amit Varma]: But you mentioned equality and I thought it's a good point.
[Amit Varma]: Your third point when you spoke about culture was about the indulgence of parents and family
[Amit Varma]: values and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that you mentioned how much parents care for their kids.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought therein also lies a great indicator of places where we are failing.
[Amit Varma]: Like I've written a lot about primary education, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And study after study has shown, you know, whether it's by the Center of Civil Society
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi or James Tooley wrote a great book called The Beautiful Tree on this.
[Amit Varma]: Study after study has shown that when presented with a choice between an illegal budget private
[Amit Varma]: school and a free government school, poor parents living in slums, you know, auto rickshaw
[Amit Varma]: drivers, maidservants and all, will spend a significant chunk of their money sending
[Amit Varma]: their kid to the budget private school rather than the free government school, which kind
[Amit Varma]: of indicates how badly our government has screwed that up.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the point, you know, I keep making is not that we don't have government
[Amit Varma]: schooling.
[Amit Varma]: We put in whatever investment we have to and we try to make that work.
[Amit Varma]: But also that we allow private schools to operate, which very often we don't because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, budget private schools like this, which are on the margins, which don't meet
[Amit Varma]: regulations like playground should be this size and all of that nonsense, just get shut
[Amit Varma]: down.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's robbing the poor of options, which is kind of...
[Amit Varma]: Or putting the price up.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: For the poor, for people who can't afford those prices.
[Guest]: And it's so absolutely, you know, and that's where it's part of our diversity thing as
[Guest]: well, you know, that we have all kinds of schools in India, you know, you have schools
[Guest]: that are good public schools, bad public schools.
[Guest]: You have good private schools, bad private schools.
[Guest]: Now, how do you deal with that?
[Guest]: One way is you simply say, we are India, we will accept it all.
[Guest]: And let the, in a sense, give parents the choice of those private schools.
[Guest]: Why do they send their kids to, I mean, you know, there have been lots of studies that
[Guest]: have been done that actually show that the quality of education that the student gets
[Guest]: in that substandard private school is worse than the education they get in the public
[Guest]: school.
[Guest]: But the parent still chooses to spend money and send their kids to the private school.
[Guest]: Usually for one reason, and one reason alone, is that it's officially an English medium
[Guest]: school.
[Guest]: That's the association that's made with getting on in life.
[Guest]: And I think we should simply recognize it and go with it and encourage English medium
[Guest]: education if necessary in the public school.
[Guest]: And what ends up happening then is it's officially English medium, but a lot of the, so the text
[Guest]: will be in English, but a lot of the explanations in the classroom are in the local language.
[Guest]: So you actually end up, I think we actually have the world's largest bilingual education
[Guest]: system in the country without officially having a bilingual education system.
[Guest]: You go into any classroom and that's what, you know, of an English medium school and
[Guest]: you will, or college, by the way, too, sometimes, and what you'll hear is explanations in the
[Guest]: local language.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, my most popular episode of the seen and the unseen in terms of downloads is actually
[Amit Varma]: one I did with Karthik Muralitharan on the state of Indian education, and you also cited
[Amit Varma]: him in the book.
[Amit Varma]: And he makes some fantastic points there.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the interesting sort of learnings about Indian education is that private school,
[Amit Varma]: public schools, outcomes are actually pretty similar, but you get way more bang for the
[Amit Varma]: buck from private schools than from public schools.
[Amit Varma]: And it all comes down to incentives, which is why what people have also been saying for
[Amit Varma]: a long time is don't fund schools, fund students, you know.
[Amit Varma]: There is this big move, you know, education vouchers, vouchers for the parents, because
[Amit Varma]: who has the incentive to make the best decision for the kid?
[Amit Varma]: It is not some random central government mandarin sitting somewhere in Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: It is a parent, the parent really cares.
[Amit Varma]: So give them education vouchers, let them vote with their feet.
[Amit Varma]: And then schools have to compete against each other and let government schools also compete
[Amit Varma]: in that melange, or let them do whatever, but at least allow private schools the space
[Amit Varma]: to go.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, these are digressions from digressions, because this often happens, like we were talking
[Amit Varma]: biography, then we came to culture, then we've gone to these different things.
[Amit Varma]: The last cultural point you mentioned was the spirit of entrepreneurship.
[Amit Varma]: And one way this plays out is, of course, you know, jugaru manipulations of the state.
[Amit Varma]: For example, there was a gathering at my house the other day, and somebody asked, somebody
[Amit Varma]: said, I have to get a driving, I don't drive, because, you know, getting a driving license
[Amit Varma]: is a pain, I'll have to give a test and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And everybody laughed and said, you fool what test I mean, these days, you know how it is,
[Amit Varma]: you just meet a tout outside and you get your license right away.
[Amit Varma]: But it's positive, because in deeply difficult times, in times of scarcity, and we are still
[Amit Varma]: mostly a desperately poor country, people find ways to get by like most of the entrepreneurship
[Amit Varma]: that we see around us is really despite the odds.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of it isn't even things that we would call entrepreneurship, like the Indian
[Amit Varma]: woman, for example, you know, I did a longish episode with Shrayana Bhattacharya on this
[Amit Varma]: a while back called the loneliness of the Indian women, Indian women have it so bad
[Amit Varma]: on so many margins, and you know, their participation in the workforce has declined, they live in
[Amit Varma]: deeply oppressive conditions, both within the house and outside the house.
[Amit Varma]: And they're finding ways to cope with it is also a kind of resourcefulness.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, that resourcefulness, that energy is all around us.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a question of unleashing it as you speak about so much in your book.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go back to biography.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are many things you mentioned that I want to like dig deep into like the
[Amit Varma]: role of the state and our economic history as it were, but let's go back to your biography.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point in time, what are the kind of books that you're reading?
[Amit Varma]: Who are your early heroes like before you go to Stanford and get the education you did
[Amit Varma]: and all of that?
[Amit Varma]: Who are the people you're looking up to?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of books are you reading?
[Guest]: So you know, so when I was when I was growing up, and I was in school in Bombay, KG first
[Guest]: and second, KG in first standard, I really struggled to read, you know, I was not a good
[Guest]: reader and my parents, especially my mother was getting very, very worried about me.
[Guest]: Something happened in the second standard, and it happened, I even remember the book,
[Guest]: it was a book called Black Beauty about a horse, one of those classic children's books.
[Guest]: And I remember I used to really struggle and read word by word and so on.
[Guest]: And suddenly, something clicked, and I could read Black Beauty cover to cover really fast
[Guest]: sentence by sentence, whole sentence, reading it together, something clicked.
[Guest]: And from that day onwards, I've been a reader.
[Guest]: So the first things that I read, I read a whole, I read a lot of Eden Blyton.
[Guest]: So a lot of Eden Blyton, when I was, you know, sort of seven, eight, nine, 10, 11.
[Guest]: And then I think at the age of 12, I discovered P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse.
[Guest]: And the first P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse book that I read was Leave it to Smith.
[Guest]: And Leave it to Smith remains one of my five favorite books of all time.
[Guest]: It's wonderful.
[Guest]: And then I started reading more and more of P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse and P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse, Gerald Durrell.
[Guest]: These were the books that I really grew up reading.
[Guest]: I didn't read much nonfiction growing up.
[Guest]: Nonfiction is something that really happened to me in college.
[Guest]: It really happened with reading a few books that really got me interested in history,
[Guest]: got me interested in the sort of lived experience of people.
[Guest]: I remember reading a very powerful book by Primo Levi called Survival in Auschwitz, which
[Guest]: was, you know, one of these books that sticks in your head.
[Guest]: George Orwell's Homage to Catalonia about the Spanish Civil War and his comments about
[Guest]: the incompetence of the Republican armies that he was fighting on the side of and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: So these were the, and then I started to read more widely, really in my 20s.
[Guest]: And now what else about the lived experience?
[Guest]: We always took a summer holiday and often a winter holiday, a summer holiday, you know,
[Guest]: where my parents, my brother and I would go somewhere.
[Guest]: One of the places that we loved going to was Kashmir.
[Guest]: So we would spend two weeks or three weeks in the summer somewhere on holiday.
[Guest]: So it was a very comfortable, very attractive, very caring.
[Guest]: I couldn't ask for a more comfortable, fulfilling, nurturing childhood.
[Guest]: And what was college like?
[Guest]: So I went to college when I was 17 and Menlo College was one year and then I moved to Stanford.
[Guest]: And Stanford was, the first term at Stanford was a great experience because, I mean, this
[Guest]: sounds very presumptuous, but I should say it because it captures, I think, what I felt
[Guest]: at the time.
[Guest]: I found for the first time that I was in a classroom with lots of people who were smarter
[Guest]: than me.
[Guest]: And that was a very good thing because it pushed me to learn a lot more.
[Guest]: And I said, I better, all through school, I did reasonably well, but I'm not sure I
[Guest]: studied that hard.
[Guest]: I mean, I studied, but not that hard.
[Guest]: I read a lot of books.
[Guest]: So underneath, with the light, with a torch, my parents didn't know I was reading.
[Guest]: I should have been sleeping.
[Guest]: But when I was in college, Stanford was a wonderful experience.
[Guest]: I learned a huge amount about different subjects, but I learned much more about myself, about
[Guest]: what I liked, about what stimulated me.
[Guest]: When I first went there, I thought I wanted to be an architect.
[Guest]: So I started off by declaring as a civil engineering major.
[Guest]: And then I went to the first of each of the civil engineering classes my junior year,
[Guest]: my third year.
[Guest]: And I said, I can't do this for one term, let alone for the rest of my life.
[Guest]: So I switched away from civil engineering and tried to become a mechanical engineering
[Guest]: major.
[Guest]: Now, mechanical engineering was a very popular major at the time.
[Guest]: So all the courses were full.
[Guest]: So I said, OK, I'll do the engineering breadth classes.
[Guest]: So I took industrial engineering classes, which were available for me to get into.
[Guest]: And I enjoyed those so much, I switched at the end of that term to industrial engineering.
[Guest]: And then I also, I was briefly an English literature major, a British studies major,
[Guest]: believe it or not, because I spent a term in Britain at the Stanford campus there, enjoyed
[Guest]: it a lot, so came back, declared British studies.
[Guest]: So I was exploring stuff and exploring sort of my intellectual interests, and then ended
[Guest]: up as an industrial engineering major and a history major at the undergraduate level.
[Guest]: And then went on to do my master's and PhD in industrial engineering.
[Guest]: And you know, they always say that PhDs are supposed to be focused and so on, I wasn't
[Guest]: focused at all.
[Guest]: I mean, even while I was a PhD, doing my PhD, I was taking courses in French history and
[Amit Varma]: so on, as I talk about in the book.
[Amit Varma]: Like these days, one trend in academia, which I think even academics are bemoaning these
[Amit Varma]: days is a hyper specialization, that you'll pick some really narrow area like marine trade
[Amit Varma]: between Ghana and Nigeria in the year 1544 and specialize in that.
[Amit Varma]: I don't even know if they have marine trade.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, and what I found delightful was like you were describing your love for your
[Amit Varma]: teacher Gordon Wright, and how you did a course in 19th century France, which you couldn't
[Amit Varma]: tell your, you know, your main advisor about.
[Amit Varma]: And also how you studied crime and punishment in modern Europe and, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, it sounds like this must have been so wildly exciting that you have so many different
[Amit Varma]: subjects taught by people who I presume are skilled storytellers who are able to sort
[Amit Varma]: of communicate that.
[Amit Varma]: At this point, how is your conception of yourself developing like you've spoken about how, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you'd fall in love with one thing, then another thing, then another thing, you come
[Amit Varma]: to Britain, okay, British studies, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: How's your conception of yourself developing through all these years, like before going
[Amit Varma]: to college, going to college, are you at some point thinking, oh, I'll take over my dad's
[Amit Varma]: company one day, I'll run that?
[Amit Varma]: Or are there other things you want to do?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you said you wanted to be an architect.
[Amit Varma]: So not that obviously.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So how is your conception of yourself developing in terms of what you want to do in terms of
[Guest]: what you love, and so on?
[Guest]: So I will, I was always clear that I was going to come back to India and work in India after
[Guest]: I finished college, maybe after working for a few years, but then I would come back.
[Guest]: How I got into the PhD, by the way, is also something of a story, which is that, you know,
[Guest]: I finished my master's in industrial engineering, and then I went to work for a consulting firm.
[Guest]: And I hated it.
[Guest]: This was in San Francisco.
[Guest]: I really hated it.
[Guest]: I didn't like the firm.
[Guest]: I didn't like management consulting as a profession.
[Guest]: I thought we were charging too much to our customers and giving them, you know, anyway,
[Guest]: I did not enjoy that experience.
[Guest]: So I said, okay, now I better start looking for another job.
[Guest]: And when I started looking for another job, I went back and met some of the teachers that
[Guest]: I had at Stanford and started asking them, you know, which companies, et cetera.
[Guest]: And the person who later became my PhD advisor, Jim Adams, said, well, have you ever thought
[Guest]: about doing a PhD?
[Guest]: And I said, no, no, I'm not the PhD type.
[Guest]: And he said, well, what do you want to know a lot more about?
[Guest]: And he says, is there a question that you really want to know the answer to?
[Guest]: And I said, well, this is 1983.
[Guest]: And I said, I'd really like to know how to create Silicon Valley in Pune.
[Guest]: And he said, why don't you do your PhD on that?
[Guest]: And I said, yes, can I?
[Guest]: And he said, yes, you can do a PhD on anything.
[Guest]: So I said, okay.
[Guest]: And my parents suddenly hear that I want to do my PhD.
[Guest]: So anyway, and I started in the Department of Industrial Engineering, even though technical
[Guest]: entrepreneurship in India was not a subject that they had any connection with.
[Guest]: But two of my three advisors were ex-chairs of the Industrial Engineering Department.
[Guest]: So as the current chair of the department then told me, he said, well, now, Shadi, you
[Guest]: could do your PhD in Swahili, and it would count as industrial engineering if these two
[Guest]: are on your committee.
[Guest]: So I started then working on technical entrepreneurship in India.
[Guest]: And it was really through the work I did for my PhD that I got interested in development
[Guest]: as a subject, in economic development.
[Guest]: And I'm clear that today, if I had to go back and redo my college days, I would do my undergraduate
[Guest]: degree in economics and history instead of industrial engineering and history.
[Guest]: And I would do my PhD in economic history, almost surely, in retrospect, would be my
[Guest]: topics.
[Guest]: I ended up doing something that was very different.
[Guest]: I'm very happy with what developed as a result.
[Guest]: But what I ended up becoming was really someone who was interested in economics and history
[Guest]: and economic history and economic development.
[Guest]: And that became my sort of academic subject and my academic leaning as an individual.
[Guest]: What else can I say about?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I don't want at all to convey that I was only into studies and I was not
[Guest]: only in fact, intellectual development was not at the top of the list at the time, probably.
[Guest]: I was having a very good time on campus, you know, with lots of friends and enjoying being
[Guest]: there and everything else.
[Amit Varma]: Then you mentioned that, you know, if you could go back in time, you'd do a PhD in economic
[Amit Varma]: history.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the thing is, you've studied economic history pretty deeply anyway, as is pretty
[Amit Varma]: obvious from the book.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also been inside the churn of that education system and gone all the way and
[Amit Varma]: done all the way till PhD.
[Amit Varma]: How relevant do you think academia is in the modern world in terms of knowledge production,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of learning, so on and so forth?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, more and more, we see that in certain domains, at least some academic
[Amit Varma]: disciplines appear to be ossified and just removed from the real world, that there is
[Amit Varma]: absolutely kind of no connection with the real world.
[Amit Varma]: Not that everything you study necessarily has to a practical value, but it at least
[Amit Varma]: has to relate to the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And there is also the sense that like one of the trends and I don't know if I've thought
[Amit Varma]: about it deeply enough to articulate it properly yet, but one of the trends that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we've seen happening in the last 20-30 years, is that everywhere, one, the mainstream is
[Amit Varma]: dissipating, whether it is in media, where there's no longer a consensus on the truth
[Amit Varma]: and everybody can produce knowledge, consume knowledge from everywhere, the mainstream
[Amit Varma]: is dissipating, whether it's in music, where there is an argument to be made that perhaps
[Amit Varma]: since the mid 90s, you know, Steve Van Zandt, Bruce Springsteen's guitarist says that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Nirvana was when rock stopped becoming mainstream, they were the last bright light
[Amit Varma]: and after that, it's all been dispersed, which is a great thing.
[Amit Varma]: It's a democratization and you're allowing a thousand flowers to bloom as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and some could argue that even nation states are losing certain kinds of
[Amit Varma]: resonance where technology allows us to be global citizens in certain ways that earlier
[Amit Varma]: geography would not allow us to be.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore gatekeepers everywhere are gone and we see this even in, say, history writing,
[Amit Varma]: for example.
[Amit Varma]: Like we were discussing before the show that our mutual friend Ram Guha is our finest living
[Amit Varma]: historian but he didn't do a PhD in history, it was something else, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you have young people like Manu Pillay and all that, who is doing a PhD in history
[Amit Varma]: but after writing four very fine books and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So what is therefore the relevance of academics?
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that this is something that we need to consider, like not just at the higher
[Amit Varma]: education level, but even this whole thing that you go to kindergarten, you do standard
[Amit Varma]: 1-10 or 1-12, you do the three years in college, in those 10 years in school, these are the
[Amit Varma]: subjects you learn.
[Amit Varma]: Like that whole format is something that was really designed in early 19th century England
[Amit Varma]: to bring out a certain kind of worker with a certain kind of skills.
[Amit Varma]: Is it relevant, is it just inertia that we are kind of sticking with it and all of that?
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that disruptions here are possible but much more difficult because the old way
[Amit Varma]: of doing things, whether it is the way school is taught, that everybody of the same age
[Amit Varma]: is in the same class learning the same things, or whether it is higher education, that they
[Amit Varma]: are so entrenched.
[Amit Varma]: So having seen it all from inside, what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: So yeah, I think that's a wonderful question, and let me try to give you my take on it without
[Guest]: any claim to it being the right take.
[Guest]: So even when I was at Stanford as an undergraduate, I had friends who I could see were not into
[Guest]: the education.
[Guest]: I mean, I enjoyed it and knew I was enjoying it, and today look back on it and say I really
[Guest]: enjoyed it.
[Guest]: So it was pure, for me it was a pure form of education, self-development, learning.
[Guest]: I loved it.
[Guest]: I could see many of my friends who didn't love it, who were turned off by it, some of
[Guest]: them, who were in some cases somewhat cynical about it, in some cases one or two dropped
[Guest]: out of the system while they were there and did their own thing, and so on.
[Guest]: But for me, it worked wonderfully.
[Guest]: It worked wonderfully at the undergraduate level, and it also worked at the PhD level.
[Guest]: You know, the one thing that a PhD is supposed to do, it's the reason PhDs by definition
[Guest]: have to be narrow, is because in that a PhD done well means that for that, on that one
[Guest]: subject, however narrow, however obscure, however irrelevant, for a short period of
[Guest]: time, you have to be the expert, the world expert on that one narrow, obscure, maybe
[Guest]: irrelevant subject.
[Guest]: And the fact that you're the world expert on that one narrow subject gives you an anchor
[Guest]: on knowledge.
[Guest]: That's the purpose of a PhD.
[Guest]: That's what a PhD is supposed to do at its best.
[Guest]: It did it for me, right?
[Guest]: It gives you a sense of confidence that you then have the ability to understand anything.
[Guest]: Maybe it's a misplaced sense of confidence, but it gives you that sense that I can make
[Guest]: sense of the world and figure it out because I've done it once for however obscure, irrelevant
[Guest]: a topic.
[Guest]: So I was fortunate also in that my topic was not that narrow.
[Guest]: It was technical entrepreneurship in India, so it was a fairly broad subject.
[Guest]: And instead of getting narrow, it enabled me to get into a degree of depth.
[Guest]: And certainly, at the time of my PhD, I'd read everything that there was out there that
[Guest]: related to technical entrepreneurship in any developing country, and there was nothing
[Guest]: on India, and then wrote something on India.
[Guest]: For me, the education system delivered wonderfully.
[Guest]: Now to come to the question that you asked of, is it relevant today?
[Guest]: Does it work for everyone?
[Guest]: I think that's a great question.
[Guest]: If it worked for me, why shouldn't it work for many others?
[Guest]: But how do you enable it to work for many others?
[Guest]: So the way in which the world has tried to answer that question, I suppose, is by improving
[Guest]: schooling.
[Guest]: So you improve schooling, whether you're Prussian Germany or whether you're modern-day Singapore,
[Guest]: you try to improve schooling standards to the point where children coming out of the
[Guest]: school system have that access then to higher education and self-development and so on that
[Guest]: I went through and that I enjoyed so much.
[Guest]: Does it work for everyone?
[Guest]: No, it's not worked for everyone in history, and it won't work today either.
[Guest]: But I worry very much about this move that you mentioned about gatekeepers becoming less
[Guest]: important in the world today, because I think gatekeepers have played a great role.
[Guest]: So for example, newspapers.
[Guest]: Newspapers are nothing, it seems to me, other than gatekeepers.
[Guest]: If you get your news from a reputable newspaper, I mean, I subscribe to Business Standard and
[Guest]: Indian Express, and then in terms of foreign ones to The Economist and the Financial Times.
[Guest]: And the reason those four is because I trust them as gatekeepers.
[Guest]: I trust that they will each display a degree of impartiality, a sense of quality, and that
[Guest]: they will try to, yeah, they'll have opinions, they'll express those opinions.
[Guest]: They're not necessarily always opinions that I share, but I trust them to do an honest
[Guest]: job of gatekeeping for me and giving me my news.
[Guest]: There are many other newspapers, we can talk about them, who I don't trust equally.
[Guest]: And so that's why these four.
[Guest]: I do not trust WhatsApp at all.
[Guest]: I do not trust social media in general, unfortunately, because there's no gatekeeping.
[Guest]: I mean, the reason I love your blog so much is because, and the reason I love your show,
[Guest]: the podcast, is because of the role you play as a gatekeeper.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I get where you're coming from, and I agree with you, but I'll push back in a
[Amit Varma]: semantic way by saying that, you know, gatekeeper carries, in my mind, a negative connotation
[Guest]: of someone who is sweeping people out, who's exclusionary, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: The word I prefer to use is filter.
[Amit Varma]: You're surrounded by sources of knowledge, you need filters to figure it out.
[Amit Varma]: And over a period of time, I think what happens, and there are two sides to this, so I'll contradict
[Amit Varma]: myself very soon.
[Amit Varma]: But the positive side to it is that over a period of time, you figure out who to trust.
[Amit Varma]: So if there might be a million blogs out there, but I know that when I go to Marginal Revolution,
[Amit Varma]: and so on, I know it's reliable, I know I can trust these guys, I know where they're
[Amit Varma]: coming from, you know, there might be a million podcasts, and there are literally more than
[Amit Varma]: a million podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: But I know which ones I like to listen to, you know, Russ Roberts, Tyler Coven, and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Like the show that I'm doing would not have existed if there were gatekeepers.
[Guest]: Because who's going to take a five hour economy?
[Guest]: I agree.
[Guest]: I take your point.
[Guest]: And you know, it's a, I think that's so.
[Guest]: So in a sense, what one needs is an open system, you know, as open a system as one can.
[Amit Varma]: But where there are these gatekeepers, filters, this is the other part of it that I think,
[Amit Varma]: one, I think people develop their own filters.
[Amit Varma]: But two, I think increasingly, we live in an age where truth seems to not matter so
[Amit Varma]: much.
[Guest]: And we're engrossed in these narrative battles that I worry about.
[Amit Varma]: And people don't care about what is true.
[Amit Varma]: People care about what confirms whatever belief they have.
[Guest]: I fully agree.
[Guest]: You know, I work very hard.
[Guest]: Well, no, that's not fair.
[Guest]: I was going to say I work very hard at trying to read the other point of view.
[Guest]: That's not true.
[Guest]: I work some at trying to understand the other point of view.
[Guest]: So I subscribe.
[Guest]: I won't mention which, but I subscribe to a particular online newspaper that has views
[Guest]: that are completely contrary to what I believe.
[Guest]: And I force myself to read it every day, even though I don't enjoy it.
[Guest]: Because I want to know what the, in a sense, other side is thinking.
[Guest]: And I've even forced myself to read a couple of books that I knew I wouldn't enjoy.
[Guest]: So I mean, you know, I don't do it enough.
[Guest]: But I consciously try to do it because I believe that polarization is one of the great challenges
[Guest]: of our times.
[Guest]: And I don't want to be part of that problem.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I also have to, you know, publishers keep sending me books and whenever someone
[Amit Varma]: will suggest a guest, I might go out and buy the book.
[Amit Varma]: So I have to read a lot of stuff that I may not necessarily enjoy.
[Amit Varma]: And I do try to engage with people.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, everybody on the show, more or less, is someone I disagree with in some way or
[Amit Varma]: the other, right.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, there are certain lines in terms of values that I can't get myself to cross.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I agree.
[Guest]: I've seen.
[Amit Varma]: If there's a certain kind of toxicity that is out there.
[Guest]: I fully agree.
[Guest]: And that's why I mean, you know, when I said, you know, even this newspaper is, I think,
[Guest]: one of the most balanced, reflecting that side, I'll mention which one afterwards.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, sort of going into the thread, like what I found quite insightful, and I'll
[Amit Varma]: think about that more after this podcast is run, where you spoke about how the PhD makes
[Amit Varma]: you focus on something small and makes you a world expert in it, and therefore it changes
[Amit Varma]: your way of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And I can totally get that, that if you're completely focused on something and getting
[Amit Varma]: deep into it, though, that work ethic, those grooves that you form in your mind, can then
[Amit Varma]: be applied to anything.
[Amit Varma]: And that's incredibly positive.
[Amit Varma]: Also, however, the flip side of that is that and this, of course, would not apply to you
[Amit Varma]: and the PhD that you did.
[Amit Varma]: But for a lot of people is that the prisms through which you look at whatever work you
[Amit Varma]: have done, those might just become your permanent prisms in a sense that, you know, you use
[Amit Varma]: them to explain the world around you, you look at everything through that.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes it's great, sometimes it's not like I remember in college, luckily, I was
[Amit Varma]: very unformed in terms of having prisms.
[Amit Varma]: So I was just very confused and through adulthood, one sees reality and you come to whatever
[Amit Varma]: views that you do.
[Amit Varma]: But I can see how, like people often say that if you're not a communist at 18, you don't
[Amit Varma]: have a heart.
[Amit Varma]: If you're not a capitalist at 30, you don't have a mind, something to that effect.
[Amit Varma]: And so I can, you know, I've seen people flit one way or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And what I in fact find today, and this is an aside, what I in fact find a danger today,
[Amit Varma]: is that today everyone is expressing themselves on social media and tying themselves down
[Amit Varma]: to positions.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas in an earlier age, they would have played around it with it in their head.
[Amit Varma]: But now they'll take positions, join a tribe, you know, posture vociferously.
[Amit Varma]: And then before you know it, they've closed themselves off and they're just thinking like
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a danger.
[Amit Varma]: We'll see how it plays out.
[Amit Varma]: But in your case, how is your prism of the way that you look at India, our economy, our
[Amit Varma]: society developing in that time, like one, you said that it was while at Stanford that
[Amit Varma]: you began to see India more clearly.
[Amit Varma]: And two, in your book, you mentioned about how the focus of the study, just from, you
[Amit Varma]: know, being about Silicon Valley in Pune shifted to Pune, where you were speaking to people
[Amit Varma]: and figuring stuff out.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how your view of India got sharpened through all of this.
[Guest]: So it was sharpened, you know, in a way which I have always found works for me.
[Guest]: So it's worked for me ever since too, which is I would read about India and I would match
[Guest]: it to my own lived experience and the experience of my parents and running a firm, et cetera,
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: So for example, when I started doing my work on technical entrepreneurship and I went around
[Guest]: and started interviewing entrepreneurs in Pune, I would read what the government schemes
[Guest]: were in entrepreneurship and fostering entrepreneurship and caring for small scale industry and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: And I would talk to all these entrepreneurs and hear what they had actually experienced
[Guest]: of those same schemes, if they knew about them, which they didn't very often.
[Guest]: But you know, they would have the same, this experience.
[Guest]: And this combination of here's what's written about a particular subject, and here's the
[Guest]: actual experience.
[Guest]: This experience may not be hugely representative of the aggregate, but it's real.
[Guest]: It's real for at least one.
[Guest]: And if it's real for at least one, that real for at least one has to fit into your broader
[Guest]: theory and scheme.
[Guest]: Because if it doesn't, then you know there's something wrong with the theory and the scheme
[Guest]: and not with the one, because you know the one is real.
[Guest]: So I've always found that that combination is very powerful for me, and as I would keep
[Guest]: reading about India, I would read about, you know, dependency theory, for example, and
[Guest]: you know, rich world is keeping the poor world poor, ripping it off, you know, ricket multinationals
[Guest]: are going around controlling technology and by controlling technology, keeping developing
[Guest]: countries in a permanent state of dependence and so on.
[Guest]: And I would look around at my lived experience and say, hey, I don't see that.
[Guest]: Has it happened?
[Guest]: Yes, probably.
[Guest]: But maybe it's happened in as exceptional circumstances as the exceptions that I'm seeing,
[Guest]: which are contrary.
[Guest]: And when I would look at what I saw around me, and I would then start saying, okay, maybe
[Guest]: there's a need for a better theory and a better understanding of what's actually happening.
[Guest]: And so I sort of came to, I came to building technical capability and economic development
[Guest]: from this combination of reading a lot of old style understanding and dependency theory
[Guest]: and so on of the late 70s and early 80s, connecting it with my lived experience of a firm in Pune,
[Guest]: and the study that I was doing and going around and visiting and talking and interviewing
[Guest]: entrepreneurs and then trying to come up with my own picture of what was actually happening.
[Guest]: So that was really the way I tried to approach this and think about it.
[Guest]: And I've tried to do that ever since, which is if I read something, I try to match what
[Guest]: I read with as factually as I can.
[Guest]: And it has to make sense, at least for that one fact.
[Amit Varma]: How important a role did writing play in the way that you developed as a thinker and the
[Amit Varma]: way you thought about the world?
[Amit Varma]: Like the great economist, Zedrey Mikloski, once said that, you know, I don't wait to
[Amit Varma]: start writing till I do my research, because writing is a form of research, right?
[Amit Varma]: So and you also mentioned earlier how, you know, one of the great things about doing
[Amit Varma]: your undergraduate courses in Stanford and all that was that they taught you how to write
[Amit Varma]: well, there was a trigger, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, you've mentioned in the book about how when you were, you know, heading
[Amit Varma]: the CII, you would write a daily journal, where you would write every day.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, even in this book, like as listeners can obviously make out, you know, you obviously
[Amit Varma]: and this would come from your teaching that you're extremely lucid, but the book is also
[Amit Varma]: very lucid and well structured and all of that, you know, in non academic language,
[Amit Varma]: one would never know you've done a PhD by reading this book.
[Guest]: I'm very, very glad to hear that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about the role that writing has played like, right, like, like what I often
[Amit Varma]: tell my writing students is that you don't think you shouldn't think of writing as something
[Amit Varma]: instrumental, in the sense that I have a goal, I have to write an article, I will sit and
[Amit Varma]: write now, or I want to write a book, I will sit and write for a few months.
[Amit Varma]: But you make writing a part of your daily life, you make it a habit, and it just helps
[Amit Varma]: the way you think it deepens your sense of self and your engagement with the world and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about the role writing has played.
[Guest]: So you know, I've written a lot at different points in my life.
[Guest]: And whenever it's been a period in my life where I've been writing a lot, I write better.
[Guest]: So I mean, I think it's a point that you've made often in your in your blog, and you know,
[Guest]: and in on the podcast that that you practice writing is something that you have to practice.
[Guest]: I fully I fully subscribe.
[Guest]: I think that's exactly the way it works.
[Guest]: And it's exactly the way it's worked for me.
[Guest]: So I, I used to write a lot when I was in college, for obvious reasons, I had to do
[Guest]: assignments, etc.
[Guest]: But when I did assignments, I always tried to pick a subject that I cared about.
[Guest]: So for example, my freshman essay for my English class, and there was was on PG Woodhouse,
[Guest]: as you would expect, but it was on an aspect of PG Woodhouse that at that time, no one
[Guest]: had looked at, which was his experience during the Second World War, where he made these
[Guest]: broadcasts on German radio, and so on, and the reactions in Britain, and so on, and making
[Guest]: sense of all that.
[Guest]: And later, by the way, I wrote, I wrote on the, you know, the, the 1857, First War of
[Guest]: Independence or Indian mutiny, depending on your perspective.
[Guest]: And the way I wrote about it was by actually going back and reading the reading what the
[Guest]: economist said in 1857 at the time about about it.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, the Stanford Library had the economists of 1857.
[Guest]: So I was able to go and read.
[Guest]: So I, so the first point about writing is, I think you should write about something you
[Guest]: care about.
[Guest]: It can be, it can be nonfiction, it can be fiction, it can be about emotion, it can be
[Guest]: about character, it could be about anything.
[Guest]: So in my journal, I would try to do that.
[Guest]: I would try to always capture how I felt, not just what happened, because what happened
[Guest]: is kind of boring.
[Guest]: You need, you need it as a record of what happened.
[Guest]: But then you need to also catch, capture how it made you feel, because that's much more
[Guest]: interesting, I think.
[Guest]: So that's one piece.
[Guest]: Second thing that started to happen for me is that when I was, when I first started working,
[Guest]: well, I had to give lectures, because my course at Stanford grew.
[Guest]: And so it became less of a seminar and more of a lecture class.
[Guest]: So I had to write those lectures.
[Guest]: And I tried to make each lecture count.
[Guest]: And so, you know, I do a lot of work of digging things out and so on.
[Guest]: And you have to make the lecture not only count in terms of content, but you have to
[Guest]: make the lecture engaging.
[Guest]: So my handouts always had Lakshman cartoons on it or other cartoons on it.
[Guest]: It was, I think, the only course in the School of Engineering that had cartoons on it.
[Guest]: I tried to make the lectures, you know, engaging in terms of quotes, in terms of personal experiences,
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: And that was a form of writing also, and polishing the writing, and the writing, the lectures
[Guest]: would improve, I think, from year to year.
[Guest]: And then I did some academic writing also at the time, which is less, less interesting.
[Guest]: And then later, I'd say two other things taught me about writing.
[Guest]: One was when I was president of CII, and I would travel around the world to give a five-minute
[Guest]: speech.
[Guest]: And if you're going to give a five-minute speech, and you're only allowed five minutes
[Guest]: because, you know, the president is speaking or something, so you're only three minutes.
[Guest]: I mean, if you're going to speak for three minutes or five minutes, you can at best try
[Guest]: to get one point across.
[Guest]: And it better be the right point because otherwise you've wasted days of your time getting to
[Guest]: wherever to give this five-minute speech.
[Guest]: So you better make that five-minute speech count.
[Guest]: So for the first time, probably, I really learned the power of brevity and being focused
[Guest]: in writing to deliver a speech.
[Guest]: I never used a single transparency, by the way, and a slide, showing my age, and you'd
[Guest]: really learn how to make one point and stick to it.
[Guest]: And then after that, when I started writing my column, it was a great disciplining experience
[Guest]: because I found that  and initially, I used to object when the person would come
[Guest]: back saying that, listen, no, you know, it's a 1,000-word column.
[Guest]: You can at best get to 1,100 words, but you can't get 1,120.
[Guest]: It has to be  you know, it can at most be 1,100.
[Guest]: And I found that that improved the writing a lot because you get rid of a lot of bumf.
[Guest]: Now, when you write a book, you know, you have the luxury of length.
[Guest]: But I have to say that I tried to go back through the book several times and edit, and
[Guest]: every time I edited, it always became shorter, not longer.
[Guest]: I mean, I removed stuff and, you know, including removing whole pages and points and so on
[Guest]: because I said, you know, what do I really want to say in this chapter?
[Guest]: Let me just say it.
[Guest]: And then at the same time, I wanted to have fun.
[Guest]: So the quotes, you know, some of the asides, some of the footnotes and the cartoons, I
[Guest]: say, you know, if I'm not going to have fun, why am I writing this book?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, you know, Blaise Pascal once said to someone that, I'm sorry for sending
[Amit Varma]: you such a long letter.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't have time to make it short.
[Guest]: Abraham Lincoln said the same thing, right, about his, about giving a speech once, where
[Guest]: I think he said the same words, probably quoting Pascal.
[Amit Varma]: Probably quoting Pascal.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, the parts that I loved about your book, like one, of course, you've nailed
[Amit Varma]: the conversational tone, but I love the personal anecdotes a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And since we mentioned that, you know, especially in your chapter on politics, there was this
[Amit Varma]: lovely anecdote on Indian politicians, which I'll just read out before we get back to the
[Amit Varma]: narrative.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, Indian politicians are petrified of being photographed holding a glass of alcohol
[Amit Varma]: in their hand.
[Amit Varma]: At a state banquet in an unnameable capital, I was fortunate to still be president-designate
[Amit Varma]: of the CIA.
[Amit Varma]: This enabled me to sit at the second table.
[Amit Varma]: The president had to be at table one with the chief minister.
[Amit Varma]: We were all served with good alcohol, no alcohol at table one, though the chief minister was
[Amit Varma]: known to like a drink as much as my predecessor and me.
[Amit Varma]: At another program, the opening dinner was held in a spectacular setting.
[Amit Varma]: Here, I was at table one and the waiters were bringing us drinks at the table.
[Amit Varma]: We all had an excellent whiskey, except the governor of the state and a member of parliament,
[Amit Varma]: both of whom were sitting with us and seemed to look distinctly thirsty.
[Amit Varma]: At some point, well before dinner was served, the waiter brought the governor a bowl of
[Amit Varma]: soup with ice cubes floating in it.
[Amit Varma]: When he started to drink with his soup spoon with some relish, the MP asked for the same
[Amit Varma]: soup.
[Amit Varma]: The waiter started to explain in a low voice and the MP sent him away with a clear instruction.
[Amit Varma]: I want that soup.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a beautiful story.
[Amit Varma]: You know, after you've done your PhD, right, and then you come back to India, tell me about
[Amit Varma]: how that journey was in industry, like, you've spent a few years engrossed in stuff that
[Amit Varma]: you're passionate about.
[Amit Varma]: And not just academics, as you said, I'm sure you were having a good time on the side.
[Amit Varma]: But you were having a good time with the academics as well.
[Amit Varma]: And now you're back in India.
[Amit Varma]: How do you decide what to do at this point?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a worry about the humdrum of daily life and the routines taking over?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you straight away just continue doing what you're loving, but, you know, engaging
[Amit Varma]: with it in a different context?
[Guest]: So I did, you know, I was fully involved in our company.
[Guest]: And one of the things that I did in the company, I was, in fact, one person once described
[Guest]: me as the official trainer of the company.
[Guest]: Trainer, I think he meant it in, I think he meant it as a compliment, but I'm not sure.
[Guest]: Because I used to do a lot of training, and I would get groups of people together and
[Guest]: we would talk about different things.
[Guest]: And one of the things that we talked about was India and what we saw around us in the
[Guest]: economy and about policy issues and about what we needed to do as a country, as a country
[Guest]: and what we needed to do as a company.
[Guest]: And then I did some of these workshops.
[Guest]: They were like three day workshops with different groups of people.
[Guest]: That was sort of summary versions of my course.
[Guest]: The outcome of one of those workshops was a vision statement for the company, which
[Guest]: was that we wanted to be a developed company in a developing country.
[Guest]: The logic was that we wanted to be, we said, how will India get to be a developed country?
[Guest]: It'll get to be a developed country if certain enterprises and individuals move first.
[Guest]: I mean, everyone's not going to move at the same time.
[Guest]: So we should set our goal as a company to be a developed company in a developing country,
[Guest]: and then hope that many more would join in that process.
[Guest]: And through that process, we would, as a country, become developed.
[Guest]: So this was the, this was sort of the perspective even in the company.
[Guest]: And I started to get involved in things outside of work in India, I mean, through the Confederation
[Guest]: of Indian Industry.
[Guest]: And quite early on, I did a couple of programs, again, boiled down versions of my course in
[Guest]: a day on two days for groups of people from industry outside.
[Guest]: And did one in Bombay, one in Pune, started to get involved in various CI committees at
[Guest]: the local Pune zone level, at the state, Maharashtra state level, Western region and national.
[Guest]: And that gave me a huge opportunity to start getting involved in policy issues of things
[Guest]: that mattered to me.
[Guest]: So, and many things seem to matter.
[Guest]: So, you know, technology issues, higher education issues, particularly, but also then later
[Guest]: on international business, trade policy, a bunch of things related to affirmative action,
[Guest]: a bunch of different areas, actually.
[Guest]: So CI really provided a wonderful platform to engage with development issues.
[Guest]: And you know, the economist Rakesh Mohan, I remember when we were chatting one day and
[Guest]: he said, you know, he said in India, he says, we have relatively few good people.
[Guest]: And I said, what do you mean relatively few good people?
[Guest]: And he says, well, he says relatively few people who want to do things and get involved
[Guest]: in things outside of their own sphere.
[Guest]: So, you know, people in industry who want to go beyond industry as an obvious example
[Guest]: for me.
[Guest]: And as a result, if you're keen on doing that, there's ample opportunity to do it.
[Guest]: And I've always felt that, you know, if you look around us in India, there's so much opportunity
[Guest]: to contribute everywhere.
[Guest]: And you can have much more fun and much more impact and really, really engage with things
[Guest]: much more than you can in any other place.
[Amit Varma]: So that's, that's what makes it, that's what makes it so enjoyable.
[Amit Varma]: A common impression that some people have of the business environment of pre-liberalization
[Amit Varma]: India was that with the state having such a heavy hand, you know, you had to be cronyist
[Amit Varma]: to survive.
[Amit Varma]: And people will talk about Tata's as one example.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise they'll say that, you know, Dhirubhai was made by that environment of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, sort of making connections everywhere, building networks, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've mentioned in your book about how you and your family scrupulously kept politics
[Amit Varma]: an arm's length away.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, your dad would not, for example, call politicians or bureaucrats or whatever
[Amit Varma]: home for dinner or lunch or whatever, they would be at an arm's length away.
[Amit Varma]: You'd do everything on sort of the straight and narrow.
[Amit Varma]: Were you, were you guys an outlier?
[Guest]: I think there were others.
[Guest]: There were others too.
[Guest]: And let me make one comment, by the way, about Dhirubhai Ambani, which is that, yes, you
[Guest]: know, he had that reputation for being very close to government, but he never let it come
[Guest]: in the way of setting up really efficient businesses.
[Guest]: You know, he took, I think, advantage of every possible loophole that he could, maybe, maybe
[Guest]: made some loopholes too, but at the same time, he built an enterprise that was highly competitive
[Guest]: and world scale, you know, execute projects executed brilliantly.
[Guest]: So, you know, he didn't let that, let that cronyism influence his competitive choices,
[Guest]: which a lot of other Indian industrialists did.
[Guest]: I think a lot of others who were close to government use that closest to government
[Guest]: to be inefficient themselves.
[Guest]: And as a result, when the economy opened up, they were swept away, they vanished.
[Guest]: And any number of names that we can come up with from both Bombay and Delhi who were prominent
[Guest]: industrialists of the 70s, who are gone as industrialists and industrial business families
[Guest]: today.
[Guest]: The second comment that I'd make about that was that I don't think we were, we were not
[Guest]: the only ones by any means.
[Guest]: There were many others like us who I think wanted to keep business, you know, industry
[Guest]: and government should stay some distance away.
[Guest]: It helped hugely that we were in Pune.
[Guest]: I think if we were in Delhi, it'd be much tougher.
[Guest]: Delhi is a much more incestuous, almost Byzantine place in terms of government industry relations.
[Guest]: I just don't like it.
[Guest]: I mean, I like Delhi as a city to visit, but I wouldn't like Delhi as a city to do business
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: I, you know, Pune, Bangalore, some extent Hyderabad, Pune, Bangalore, I think are much
[Guest]: more interesting, encouraging places to do business, maybe even Chennai.
[Amit Varma]: One of the resonant parts of your book was where, again, you, you know, delve into the
[Amit Varma]: personal and you talk about how when Manmohan Singh gave that 1991 reform speech, you and
[Amit Varma]: your brother were so inspired and you sat down and it kind of made you want to do things
[Amit Varma]: differently within your company as well.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that, about the charge that you felt and where it took you.
[Guest]: So, you know, when we heard his budget speech and we heard the speech on television and
[Guest]: then I read the speech and then I used his speech, by the way, in my course for the entire
[Guest]: time I taught it after that, because I think it's really one of the great speech in itself
[Guest]: and it's such a watershed in change and direction.
[Guest]: And that speech, as I say in the book, led to my brother Farhad and me sort of sitting
[Guest]: down and saying, okay, how do we, what do we change in our business now?
[Guest]: And we said, let's start by asking ourselves the question that if, you know, at that time
[Guest]: all the products that we made were protected with import tariffs of anything from 200 to
[Guest]: 400 percent, right, 200 to 400 percent.
[Guest]: Okay, a lot of the inputs that we got also had 200, 400 percent duties on them.
[Guest]: So yeah, that's 200 to 400 percent tariff on the imported, on the items we made.
[Guest]: We said, if it was at zero percent, you know, what would we still make?
[Guest]: What would we be competitive with?
[Guest]: And it was a sobering exercise because we sat down with our management team, we looked
[Guest]: at all of the products and we said, well, probably about half would not be competitive,
[Guest]: even if we could get all the inputs at zero tariff.
[Guest]: So then we said, okay, what do we do?
[Guest]: So we said, we have to do two things.
[Guest]: One, change what we do with technology.
[Guest]: So R&D, which was earlier focused almost entirely on indigenization, on doing locally what was
[Guest]: previously imported, you know, some component that was imported, make it here.
[Guest]: R&D now has to develop products that we can sell worldwide.
[Guest]: So that was the first goal.
[Guest]: And it took a while before that started to show up.
[Guest]: It took three, four years before we started to get a regular flow of products coming out
[Guest]: from our R&D unit.
[Guest]: We increased the number of engineers in R&D.
[Guest]: It helped a lot that we had a couple of really good capable people who joined, one of whom
[Guest]: is our current CEO actually, in R&D as an engineer at that time and just did a wonderful
[Guest]: job of building out our R&D capability and team.
[Guest]: And the second thing we said, look, the world's going to be coming to India.
[Guest]: If we want to know how to compete with them, let's learn how to compete with them outside
[Guest]: of India.
[Guest]: So we decided to start exporting and go international as a way of forcing ourselves to learn how
[Guest]: to compete with the best outside of India.
[Guest]: And we said, if we can compete with them outside of India, we can compete with them inside
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: So in a sense, it was an inward-looking approach, but a very effective one.
[Guest]: And as we started exporting, we suddenly discovered that actually these export markets were very
[Guest]: attractive.
[Guest]: We could do more just for the sake of the export markets and not only as a learning
[Guest]: tool for how to compete inside the country.
[Amit Varma]: And it would seem to me that even in this approach, even in saying that, OK, these tariffs
[Amit Varma]: are going to go, we are going to have to compete, what can we do to get better and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: it feels that that approach is also a bit of an outlier approach.
[Amit Varma]: Because a typical approach that I would more expect is of industrialists wanting to protect
[Amit Varma]: their turf.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, the Bombay Plan of 1944 famously agreed with Nehru, central commander
[Amit Varma]: of the economy and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And part of the reason, no doubt, was that they are insulating themselves from competition
[Amit Varma]: and they are having a protected marketplace and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And typically, how interest groups in the US also work is that you will have corporate
[Amit Varma]: interest groups which are always fighting to protect themselves from competition, which
[Amit Varma]: is why I say that market-friendly and business-friendly are two completely different things.
[Amit Varma]: Market-friendly means you have free markets, you're benefiting consumers everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Business-friendly means you're benefiting big businesses, which will want to keep competition
[Amit Varma]: out and they'll kind of hurt consumers.
[Amit Varma]: And I would therefore imagine that industrialists and industry lobbies would actually not be
[Amit Varma]: ambivalent or lukewarm about opening up too much, because they also want to protect their
[Amit Varma]: turf and their territory.
[Amit Varma]: Like you said, many of the industrialists of the 70s just vanished.
[Amit Varma]: So within the community, within the business community, for example, or within CII, which
[Amit Varma]: you would go on to head, were there signs of these ambivalence?
[Amit Varma]: Like, was your approach sort of the universal thing, let's go, this is good for India and
[Amit Varma]: we'll adapt and we'll be good?
[Guest]: It wasn't the universal approach.
[Guest]: It was a somewhat exceptional approach, but there were enough other firms that also believed
[Guest]: that this was the right thing for us.
[Guest]: I talk about how at that time, a friend of mine, Ashok Desai, and we'd become friends
[Guest]: because I read something he'd written on technology and I was doing my PhD, I wrote him a fan
[Guest]: letter, he wrote back, he sent me more things.
[Guest]: We started meeting, we became good friends.
[Guest]: And Ashok was the chief economic advisor at that time to Manmohan Singh.
[Guest]: And he put me on this group of industrialists that would meet each year before the budget.
[Guest]: And it was really striking to me that at those meetings with Manmohan Singh, every industrialist
[Guest]: would start off by saying, Mr. Finance Minister, you're doing such a wonderful job, your new
[Guest]: direction for India, opening things up, you're creating a completely new country, et cetera,
[Guest]: et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: And they'd praise him to the hilt.
[Guest]: And then with four exceptions, they would say, but of course, our sector is different
[Guest]: and we need continued protection and this is why.
[Guest]: And the exceptions were Ratan Tata, Keshav Mahindra, whoever happened to be that year's
[Guest]: president of CI, and me.
[Guest]: And after the first such meeting, I made this comment and I was clearly the least known,
[Guest]: I mean, completely unknown in that group.
[Guest]: And Ashok told me afterwards that he put me in the group because Manmohan asked him, saying
[Guest]: that, listen, who's he?
[Guest]: And he says, no, you'll find him interesting, you'll find his views interesting.
[Guest]: And after the first meeting, when Manmohan Singh was saying bye-bye to everyone, he said
[Guest]: to me, he says, keep saying the things you're saying.
[Guest]: It's important to say it.
[Guest]: I thought, listen, great, thank you.
[Guest]: And I was basically saying that, listen, your Indian industry is ready for competition with
[Guest]: the world and go faster and further than you already are.
[Amit Varma]: And you also mentioned in your book, by the way, that you were placed between Ratan Tata
[Amit Varma]: and Mukesh Ambani.
[Amit Varma]: So you were on all the front page of newspapers the next day because everyone wanted to show
[Guest]: those two together.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, and they couldn't show the two of them together without having me in
[Guest]: the middle.
[Guest]: I mean, it was, in fact, it was a very funny consequence.
[Guest]: There was someone who later became our head of R&D, who joined us because he saw the photograph,
[Guest]: you know, he'd interviewed with us, he didn't know who this small company in Pune was, etc.
[Amit Varma]: And he joined us because he saw that photograph and said, hey, this guy's a cool guy.
[Amit Varma]: I had a similar bizarre experience where around 2009, Business Week magazine made a list of
[Amit Varma]: India's 50 most powerful people.
[Amit Varma]: And for some reason, I presume it was my blogging or whatever, they put me on it.
[Amit Varma]: And they did it in alphabetical order of last name.
[Amit Varma]: So I was between Sachin Tendulkar and Lalu Prasad Yadav.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, equally distinguished company.
[Amit Varma]: Now, from the scene that you've just described, that, you know, Ashok Desai calls you along
[Amit Varma]: with all these industrialists, Manmohan is chatting with you, he's having a personal
[Amit Varma]: word, he keeps saying what you're saying.
[Amit Varma]: From this, we, you know, move to the current day, where I'll read out another passage from
[Amit Varma]: your book, where you write, in CII, we always say that we do not see any merit in criticizing
[Amit Varma]: in public.
[Amit Varma]: We would rather offer constructive criticism in private.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with that approach.
[Amit Varma]: Public criticism fosters defensiveness more than receptiveness.
[Amit Varma]: My experience, though, is that we very rarely, and that too only with highly selected ministers,
[Amit Varma]: often criticism in private too.
[Amit Varma]: I will make an assertion.
[Amit Varma]: I know no industrialist today who thinks this government is open to criticism.
[Amit Varma]: And it is not only industrialists.
[Amit Varma]: One of our leading economists, returning from a pre-budget meeting led by the Prime Minister
[Amit Varma]: in January 2021, said people were not giving bad news to the government, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So is this change the sign of something deeper?
[Amit Varma]: Or does it just have to do with the individuals in charge at this particular moment in time?
[Amit Varma]: Because you've elsewhere, you know, praised Arun Jaitley and spoken about how well you
[Amit Varma]: got on with him.
[Amit Varma]: And in a different episode, I mean, I've chatted with multiple guests about how at one time,
[Amit Varma]: as far as the finance ministry was concerned, there would be a certain continuity after
[Amit Varma]: liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, in Vajpayee's time, the finance ministry would also be talking to Chidambaram,
[Amit Varma]: also be talking to these guys.
[Amit Varma]: In 2014, when the BJP won, you know, there was a certain continuity of policy for a while
[Amit Varma]: from Chidambaram's ministry to Jaitley's ministry, till I mean, after a few months of that, everything
[Amit Varma]: kind of turned around and went to hell.
[Amit Varma]: And that's another story.
[Amit Varma]: So there was that policy environment, which speaks of openness, which speaks of conviviality,
[Amit Varma]: where you're, you know, always seeking out views, speaking to stakeholders, you know,
[Amit Varma]: has that gone?
[Amit Varma]: And if it's gone, is it because of individuals who happen to be in power and things may get
[Amit Varma]: better when other people come, or is it because the change in the political and governing
[Amit Varma]: culture where things like this have just ceased to matter?
[Guest]: I'll give you an explanation, which it's sort of my theory.
[Guest]: And I'm not, again, I'm not making any claim that it's the right theory, but it's the only
[Guest]: theory that I can figure out that seems to make sense to me of what I see.
[Guest]: I think it has to do with if the minister has lost an election, has seen power as minister
[Guest]: and has then lost an election, that teaches humility.
[Guest]: With humility comes openness and receptiveness to input.
[Guest]: So that was true of Arun Jaitley.
[Guest]: That's true of Nitin Gadkari.
[Guest]: It's true of a few ministers, but very few ministers in the current government.
[Guest]: And you can make a list and if you make that list, I think you'll find that there are very
[Guest]: few who were ministers earlier because you'd have to go back to the Vajpayee government
[Guest]: by and large.
[Guest]: And then they lost power and then came back as ministers later on.
[Guest]: I think that teaches humility when you lose power and it teaches openness.
[Guest]: If you've only experienced power, you've come to power, you've played whatever roles in
[Guest]: other walks of life, et cetera, you've become a minister.
[Guest]: Maybe you start to believe in your own infallibility and your own ownership of the truth.
[Guest]: And that then makes one less open.
[Guest]: So that's my explanation.
[Guest]: I think it's a sort of pragmatic, non-ideological explanation.
[Guest]: But I find it convincing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And to take it further, when Akar Patel and I recorded an episode, one of the things we
[Amit Varma]: speculated on is this vicious circle where you get a sense that somebody in power doesn't
[Amit Varma]: want to listen to criticism or contrary views.
[Amit Varma]: So nobody gives him contrary views.
[Guest]: Yes, exactly.
[Guest]: It's a vicious circle and then you have an echo chamber.
[Guest]: That's exactly right.
[Guest]: And that's exactly what then happens.
[Guest]: And that's why I think people would say things, now, Arun Jaitley, who I really liked, I mean,
[Guest]: I really got on very well with and I really appreciated and liked, he loved to gossip.
[Guest]: And you would have the most wonderful, hilarious conversations about all a variety of different
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: He wasn't necessarily that interested in engaging in deep policy discussions, except on certain
[Guest]: topics where he was and he was incredibly sharp and receptive and bright and articulate
[Guest]: at the same time.
[Guest]: Nitin Gadkari is also like that, you know, engages, keen on input, wants to hear everything.
[Guest]: I think very, you know, that's what makes for better policy, it seems to me.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know if you can say this on the record, but did Mr. Jaitley know about demonetization
[Amit Varma]: before it was announced?
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: But the word is that he found out about it very, very little before it actually happened.
[Guest]: But that's the word.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know.
[Guest]: This is not something he ever told me.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: So let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And when we come back from the break, we'll really dig deep into your book, because we've
[Amit Varma]: been talking about your life so far, taking digressions and all of it is so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And now it's time to also talk about the book and your many insights in there.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it, only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Naushad Forbes about his wonderful book, The Struggle and The Promise
[Amit Varma]: and the emphasis there, of course, being on the promise.
[Amit Varma]: But we have to talk about the struggle as well.
[Amit Varma]: So we've spoken about sort of this longest sweep of history of the scribe, where once
[Amit Varma]: there was much more inequality.
[Amit Varma]: We were all equally poor.
[Amit Varma]: That's the way the world was.
[Amit Varma]: Things changed over the centuries.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually we got here.
[Amit Varma]: Now tell me a little bit about India, like you, you quoted from this economist article
[Amit Varma]: of 1991, where eloquently you said, quote, the economist did a survey of the Indian economy
[Amit Varma]: in June 1991, in which it said, and now you're quoting the economist, nowhere in the world
[Amit Varma]: is a gap between what might have been achieved and what has been achieved as great as it
[Amit Varma]: is in India, stop good.
[Amit Varma]: And it reminded me of another famous quote, but I can't for the life of me remember who
[Amit Varma]: said it, which is that the saddest words in the English language are the words that might
[Amit Varma]: have been.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so lay out briefly where we kind of went wrong, because at another point, you
[Amit Varma]: compare us with Southeast Asia and China, like you again, I'll quote this better.
[Amit Varma]: In 1960, South Korea and India had much the same per capita GDP.
[Amit Varma]: In 1980, China and India had much the same per capita GDP.
[Amit Varma]: South Korea at $32,000 is now 15 times richer than we are.
[Amit Varma]: And China at $10,300 is five times richer.
[Amit Varma]: It's all a matter of growth rates.
[Amit Varma]: And then you talk about the different growth rates and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, where did we go wrong in broad strokes, if you can sort of paint that picture.
[Guest]: So where we went wrong, I mean, and this is not, this is not me.
[Guest]: This is, you know, many, many economists, Jagdish Bhagwati and many others who've talked
[Guest]: about this, is really in the role of the state and the trade policy that we followed.
[Guest]: And the role of the state was increasingly intrusive.
[Guest]: It brought in controls and regulations and so on.
[Guest]: This particularly grew after Nehru.
[Guest]: With Nehru, there were some calls that were perhaps wrong.
[Guest]: In particular on, I think, the whole role of public sector primacy in the economy, second,
[Guest]: you know, locating public R&D in autonomous R&D institutions instead of in the higher
[Guest]: education system, and probably emphasizing higher education over school education.
[Guest]: I would say those three areas were mistakes on Nehru's part.
[Guest]: But I'm convinced that if Nehru had lived by the late 60s, early 70s, we would have
[Guest]: changed direction.
[Guest]: I think where we really went wrong was under Indira Gandhi, where the controls grew in
[Guest]: the economy.
[Guest]: It was supplemented by a distrust of institutions that Nehru had really built up in the country,
[Guest]: independent institutions that he gave a lot of credibility to.
[Guest]: And as a result, any institution that came in the way of Mrs. Gandhi's way of wanting
[Guest]: to do things, she squashed and tried to control or change the head off or whatever.
[Guest]: And a real shift inward in terms of trade policy, you know, and a focus on import substitution,
[Guest]: you know, very high tariffs, tariffs that got higher with each passing year, a ban on
[Guest]: imports of all manner of different items, and we became a very inward-looking country.
[Guest]: Things started to open up under, actually, first under the Janata government, and then
[Guest]: under Indira Gandhi when she came back in 1980, her last term in government, she started
[Guest]: to open the economy up a little bit, particularly in terms of technology imports that started
[Guest]: to open up in the 80s.
[Guest]: And then the opening up continued under Rajiv Gandhi, again, you know, on technology, on
[Guest]: foreign investment, on moving away from the public sector, playing a prime role in the
[Guest]: economy, et cetera.
[Guest]: That was all that all started under Rajiv Gandhi.
[Guest]: But the really decisive shift happens in 1991, where you then say, OK, openness on the trade
[Guest]: policy front, so tariffs come down dramatically, the rupee is devalued to go with the lower
[Guest]: tariffs, the scrapping of industrial licensing, you add otherwise, we were the only country
[Guest]: in the world that had maximum capacity restrictions, you know, that if you had a licensed plant,
[Guest]: you couldn't produce more, you could only produce up to that limit.
[Guest]: So you know, all of that went, so industrial licensing was scrapped.
[Guest]: We had a big change, for example, in capital issues, where earlier, you know, any capital
[Guest]: issue by a company, when they listed, the price of the issue would be determined by
[Guest]: the controller of capital issues, not by the firm.
[Guest]: So that was, again, we moved away from that.
[Guest]: Firms were able to set their own price, decide what to list at.
[Guest]: And you see a huge boom that takes place in the 90s, with many new enterprises getting
[Guest]: started, many small firms starting to really take off and grow big, and many of these older
[Guest]: enterprises that couldn't cope going by the wayside and disappearing.
[Guest]: So you see that story really starting to emerge from the 90s onwards.
[Guest]: And it helped that there were sectors that started to emerge then.
[Guest]: The IT services sector really comes into its own.
[Guest]: It started earlier, but it really comes into its own in the 90s, where it becomes a big
[Guest]: engine of growth.
[Guest]: The pharmaceutical sector, same, comes into its own in the 90s.
[Guest]: And by the late 90s, the automobile and auto components sector really starts to take off
[Guest]: and come into its own.
[Guest]: And those three, I think, industry segments really start to power the India economic story
[Guest]: going forward.
[Guest]: And then in the 2000s, we see many new sectors start up.
[Guest]: A lot of the services sectors that we've seen, whether it's health care, whether it's education,
[Guest]: and a lot of the services that retail, shopping malls, construction, a huge construction boom,
[Guest]: and so on, which sort of joins the India growth story.
[Amit Varma]: So here's again a broader question.
[Amit Varma]: Like, first of all, before the broader question, obviously, I think people often understate
[Amit Varma]: how bad Indira truly was.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, people remember her for the emergency, but I just think that her economic
[Amit Varma]: policies were crimes on humanity.
[Guest]: Economic policies were terrible.
[Amit Varma]: Were terrible.
[Amit Varma]: They kept millions in poverty for decades longer than necessary.
[Guest]: And was all sloganeering.
[Guest]: You know, this Gareebi Hatao was a populist slogan to end all populist slogans.
[Guest]: And you know, it was a classic illustration of trying to fool enough people, you know,
[Guest]: to get reelected without actually wanting to do anything that improved matters.
[Amit Varma]: So here's the broader question.
[Amit Varma]: Like when we look back, I think that fundamentally, it is not simply a question of choosing this
[Amit Varma]: policy over that.
[Amit Varma]: It is a mindset issue.
[Amit Varma]: Like Nehru famously once said to JRD Tata that, you know, quote, do not talk to me of
[Amit Varma]: profit.
[Amit Varma]: It is a dirty word.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: You also mentioned in your book about how when it comes to what we would today call
[Amit Varma]: Atman Nirbharta, he once said, I'd rather have a secondhand product made in India than
[Amit Varma]: a first-rate product made elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And that whole mindset that, you know, looking at the economy as a zero-sum game, that mindset
[Amit Varma]: of that distrust of private enterprise, that desire for the state to control everything,
[Amit Varma]: a lot came from that mindset.
[Amit Varma]: Now, we might well say that, okay, it's fine.
[Amit Varma]: We suffered through that.
[Amit Varma]: But the arc of history goes towards freedom in this case.
[Amit Varma]: And 91 happens and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But what has happened there is that, you know, you talk about 91 to 2017 as, you know, years
[Amit Varma]: when we kind of did well, various other economists I speak to like Pooja Mehra, Ajay Shah, Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Rajgopalan, they would end at 2011 when things kind of start going down.
[Unknown]: But that's a different matter.
[Unknown]: That's a technical matter.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it depends on which indicators you're kind of looking at.
[Amit Varma]: But the sense there is, and this is, you know, Ajay has also made this lament in episodes
[Amit Varma]: that he's done with me, that, you know, at that time, there was like a perfect storm
[Amit Varma]: in the sense not only was there a crisis, which allowed you to carry these reforms out,
[Amit Varma]: but there was that intellectual ballast and a community of elites who believed in them
[Amit Varma]: and who cared about them.
[Amit Varma]: And Ajay's contention is that that has dissipated, that that is not there anymore.
[Amit Varma]: So not only has a momentum gone in a political sense, but even that community of thinkers
[Amit Varma]: who believed in it, the Ashok Desai's of the world, for example, are no longer there.
[Amit Varma]: Ashok, Monte Kaluwalia, Rakesh Mohan, NK Singh, all of them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in retrospect, people we can look back and think of as such great figures in history.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things Ajay keeps talking about is how we need to build that back, build a
[Amit Varma]: community of young people who can kind of take that space.
[Amit Varma]: Different matter.
[Amit Varma]: Now, couple of things.
[Amit Varma]: One, therefore, there is the pessimism, because I always have to express pessimism at some
[Amit Varma]: point that that arc doesn't necessarily go towards freedom.
[Amit Varma]: And in a social context, I just feel we're in a terrible place and maybe we can come
[Amit Varma]: to that later.
[Amit Varma]: But even in the context of what's happening to the economy, it's kind of going downhill.
[Amit Varma]: But the deeper question there is, and you spoke about Gareebi Hatao and why it is such
[Amit Varma]: a powerful slogan.
[Amit Varma]: The deeper thing here is that the truths of economics, that trade is a positive sum game,
[Amit Varma]: that there is spontaneous order in economies, they don't need to be organized from the top
[Amit Varma]: down.
[Amit Varma]: All these deep truths of the way economies work are unintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: We are wired to think of the world in zero-sum ways.
[Amit Varma]: We are wired to think of anything that is there to have been built by someone, to have
[Amit Varma]: been planned by someone, that whole notion of spontaneous order doesn't apply.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, it's even though a slogan like Gareebi Hatao is, you know, and when you look
[Amit Varma]: at the policy she's carrying out is simply nonsense, they are intuitive, and therefore,
[Amit Varma]: they play into an easy kind of populism, like one of the ways that I think one of the core
[Amit Varma]: aspects of populism everywhere is that it depends on simplistic narratives.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody gets it.
[Amit Varma]: It's simple.
[Guest]: You know, even when Trump came to power, for example, so his narrative for why jobs are
[Amit Varma]: going down in Middle America are one, immigrants are coming and taking your jobs, immigration
[Amit Varma]: bad, and they're shipping your jobs to China, China bad.
[Amit Varma]: And we know that's not true, right?
[Amit Varma]: But simplistic narratives sell.
[Amit Varma]: And even today, my worry, therefore, is that a politician's incentive is always going to
[Amit Varma]: be the next election.
[Amit Varma]: He will do what gets him votes.
[Amit Varma]: And what will get him votes are these populist narratives.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and it almost, if I am to sort of take a darker view than I actually do,
[Amit Varma]: but I'm perhaps overstating it, it's almost like a lucky accident at 91 could happen that
[Amit Varma]: those people were there, that that crisis happened.
[Amit Varma]: And we could lift those 300, 400 million people out of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: But that line of causation is not sort of easily understood.
[Guest]: So what's your sense of this?
[Guest]: So, you know, the argument that I try to make is that reform happens in India by lucky accidents.
[Guest]: So I like that phrasing.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean you can't prepare to take advantage when the lucky accident does
[Guest]: happen.
[Guest]: So what is the accident that you need to have come together?
[Guest]: You need a committed politician, so a minister who wants to get something done, a senior
[Guest]: bureaucrat, secretary or joint secretaries, at least, who know what needs to be done and
[Guest]: have the competence and so on to do it, and third, preparation on what needs to be done.
[Guest]: So my argument is that, say, for example, from CIA, from the Confederation of Indian
[Guest]: Industry, we should constantly be prepared and ready with the what needs to be done.
[Guest]: That's within our control.
[Guest]: Getting the right bureaucrat, getting the right minister is not within our control.
[Guest]: But when the minister and bureaucrat lines up, we better make sure that that third staff
[Guest]: being prepared with what needs to be done is ready and available in granular, detailed
[Guest]: form.
[Guest]: Because if it is, then suddenly something will move.
[Guest]: What brings that minister together with that competent bureaucrat is an accident.
[Guest]: So that's how I think reform happens.
[Guest]: So I think we had that preparatory work that had happened, you know, the M document from
[Guest]: Montague and so on, Ashok Desai, you know, with his influence, etc.
[Guest]: But you had this M document, you had an industrial policy paper that had been worked on by Rakesh
[Guest]: Mohan, all of this stuff was in place, a lot of contact with CIA, a lot of input from CIA
[Guest]: at the time and Tarun Das and so on.
[Guest]: All of this is in place in 1991.
[Guest]: You then have Manmohan Singh coming in.
[Guest]: You have Montague as the finance secretary.
[Guest]: You have Ashok Desai as the chief economic advisor.
[Guest]: You have N.K.
[Guest]: Singh as the revenue secretary.
[Guest]: You have A.N.
[Guest]: Varma in the PMO.
[Guest]: You have Rakesh Mohan in the industry ministry, and things happen, right?
[Guest]: It is this happy accident, but it's a happy accident that only comes to fruit because
[Guest]: there was that preparation that was in place.
[Guest]: And I think that's how we have to see reform.
[Guest]: We have to be ready.
[Guest]: So on higher education, we need to be clear.
[Guest]: These are the things that we need to do.
[Guest]: We need to have policies worked out.
[Guest]: Same on technology and CSIR and everything else, you know, we should be clear on what
[Guest]: needs to be done.
[Guest]: And then if we're lucky enough to get the right minister of science and technology and
[Guest]: the right secretary DST, we can move.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you mentioned Lincoln earlier, and there's also this quote by Lincoln about how
[Amit Varma]: if he has five hours to chop down a tree, he'll spend the first four hours sharpening
[Amit Varma]: the axe, which is kind of what preparation seems like.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: If I am to be a little negative about it and give, you know, come up with another metaphor,
[Amit Varma]: I would say it's like running into a wall again and again, hoping that at some point
[Guest]: a door will open.
[Guest]: That's right, or sometime you hit the door, it will open.
[Guest]: You have to have that patience.
[Guest]: You have to have that patience in our, and you know, if you have that patience, I think
[Guest]: we've seen things move and reforms happen, which you never thought would be possible.
[Guest]: I mean, GST is a very good example, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, GST was spoken about for the first time by Yashwant Sinha when he was
[Guest]: finance minister in the Vajpayee government, then repeated several times by Chidambaram
[Guest]: in the UPA government, and then it comes back and actually happens under Modi and Jaitley.
[Amit Varma]: But the implementation was massively botched, I have to say.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I agree.
[Guest]: But at the same time, it took time.
[Guest]: It took time.
[Guest]: And the net effect of GST is positive.
[Guest]: The net, you know, at the end of the day, could GST be better?
[Guest]: Yes, without question.
[Guest]: But was GST better than what we had just before GST?
[Amit Varma]: Hugely better.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I know small business owners who will actually disagree with that a bit, but
[Guest]: I, let's not get into the weeds, but.
[Guest]: No, no, they do because of how cumbersome the formalities are.
[Guest]: It adds a big regulatory burden, and the fact that you have to do registrations and returns
[Guest]: in each state in the country is a very stupid thing to have done.
[Guest]: You know, it got all the states to go along, but it's very onerous in terms of the burden
[Guest]: it places, especially on small firms.
[Guest]: So I mean, I take the point, but is it, if you say, is it better than what came before?
[Guest]: I mean, before, every state had, you see, you had the same requirement.
[Guest]: You had to file a sales tax return in every state.
[Guest]: So it was no less burdensome, even for small firms then.
[Guest]: And you didn't get the offset of input taxes.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the writers I find most insightful on the subject of the state is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: Francis Fukuyama.
[Amit Varma]: He's written those two great books about the history of the state, and he's also written
[Amit Varma]: a different book on governance.
[Amit Varma]: And I love the framework he brings to mind when we talk about the state, where he talks
[Amit Varma]: about the scope and the strength of the state, right?
[Amit Varma]: Scope being how many things it does and strength being state capacity, how strong it is in
[Amit Varma]: those.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of strikes me that the problem with India is that the scope is too large
[Amit Varma]: and the strength is too small.
[Amit Varma]: So we have a weak state that does many things instead of a strong state that does a few
[Amit Varma]: things but doesn't bloody well.
[Amit Varma]: You know, things like law and order, defense, and, you know, we kind of agree on that.
[Amit Varma]: But we have a state that does many things and does them badly.
[Amit Varma]: Another framework that I find interesting to think about it is James Buchanan's framework
[Amit Varma]: of looking at the state, where he talks about, on the one hand, a state that is protective
[Amit Varma]: and productive, and on the other hand, a state that is predatory.
[Amit Varma]: And states, by their very nature, as public choice theory will tell you, tend to move
[Amit Varma]: towards a predatory, because power always corrupts.
[Amit Varma]: And any state will always find ways to accumulate more power to exercise more power.
[Amit Varma]: Even you've given examples of how during COVID, you know, at one point, I think you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: something like it takes four hours to call a lockdown and four months to come back from
[Amit Varma]: it, to get the economy working again.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a general tendency through history of just states getting more and more powerful.
[Amit Varma]: And I think in India, you know, I think the rule of law is absent.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe privileged people like you or me can use our connections and find some kind of
[Amit Varma]:  but that's not the rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: For most people in this country, the rule of law is simply absent, especially for the
[Amit Varma]: underprivileged, if you're Muslim or Dalit or woman or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And we are fundamentally a predatory state.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of pretty much all we are.
[Amit Varma]: And you've spoken at length about this, you know, how we should  I'll read this passage
[Amit Varma]: out by you where you write, the state should stop doing many, many things, owning the public
[Amit Varma]: sector banks and insurance companies, fixing pharmaceutical and stent prices, telling colleges
[Amit Varma]: what fees they should charge, determining if we should stand for the national anthem
[Amit Varma]: and when it should be played, and dictating whether we can eat beef or not.
[Amit Varma]: I say this not as an ideological choice, but as a practical proposition.
[Amit Varma]: If there is one thing I have learned to appreciate of the workings of our government, it is that
[Amit Varma]: the commitment and knowledge of the highest levels of government, secretaries, additional
[Amit Varma]: joint secretaries, so on, is matched only by the paucity of talent further down the
[Amit Varma]: system.
[Amit Varma]: This means the state has very limited implementation capacity.
[Amit Varma]: And if we wish to progress, we had better focus on just a few things and get the state
[Amit Varma]: out of the way for everything else, leaving the rest to India's entrepreneurial energy,
[Amit Varma]: private enterprise and the market stop good.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also an argument my friend Ruben Abraham often makes about the opportunity
[Amit Varma]: cost of state capacity that on the one hand, there is of course, a principled argument
[Amit Varma]: that the state should only do ABC and not the rest of the alphabet.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, there is the opportunity cost argument, which you also made eloquently,
[Amit Varma]: that the state has the capacity to only do three things to do the ones that matter.
[Amit Varma]: So I wanted to elaborate on this a bit.
[Amit Varma]: But the larger question that I keep coming to is, how do we ever get there?
[Amit Varma]: Like is it like you've studied economic history?
[Amit Varma]: Is there an example of the state actually getting out of the way of getting smaller,
[Amit Varma]: like apart from a major war or destruction or whatever, like even when say, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Reagan came to America saying pretty much the same things, you know, what we found was
[Amit Varma]: that even within him, the state just expanded.
[Amit Varma]: It's like it was a beast that even he couldn't find.
[Amit Varma]: And you have this great quote by him and in your book where you said the nine scariest
[Amit Varma]: words in the English language, I'm from the government and I'm here to help Ronald Reagan
[Amit Varma]: said that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this, because it is at one level, it is an ideal and both
[Amit Varma]: of us would agree that this is our utopia.
[Amit Varma]: The state does a few things, does them damn well, otherwise it enables and protects civil
[Amit Varma]: society, which does its own thing.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, is there movement towards it, is movement towards it possible?
[Guest]: What is your sense?
[Guest]: So two examples, one from the UK and one from ourselves.
[Guest]: So in the UK, Margaret Thatcher is, I think, a great illustration of the state actually
[Guest]: getting out of doing many, many things.
[Guest]: You know, privatization, huge privatization program where British Leyland, British Airways,
[Guest]: British Telecom, all of them get privatized.
[Guest]: You know, the move away from the state controlling exchange, getting rid of exchange controls,
[Guest]: getting rid of a whole bunch of things again, right, getting the state out of doing R&D,
[Guest]: you know, in terms of privatizing what was then called the National Research Development
[Guest]: Corporation in the UK.
[Guest]: So I mean, many, many, I think a very significant move away from the state that was sold to
[Guest]: the public in very popular terms.
[Guest]: And you know, it comes back to a point that you made earlier on, which is that populist
[Guest]: rhetoric sometimes can pick simplistic solutions or simplistic policies that are only populist
[Guest]: and sound good, but don't have any substance and certainly don't have any effect.
[Guest]: But you can also come up with popular communication that is powerful and pushes reform forward.
[Guest]: And I think a great example of that is actually what the Thatcher government did in the UK,
[Guest]: where they hired Saatchi and Saatchi as an ad agency to sell their reform program to
[Guest]: the public.
[Guest]: I think probably one of the best investments they made at the time.
[Guest]: Now, take our own example, post 1991, the state literally became smaller.
[Guest]: You know, now, OK, it didn't literally become smaller.
[Guest]: But in relative terms, it certainly became smaller.
[Guest]: If your metric is government officials or bureaucrats per unit of GDP, the state became
[Guest]: dramatically smaller between 1991 and 2017.
[Guest]: And it's maybe something that we should try and measure sometime.
[Guest]: Maybe I'll try to do it.
[Guest]: But it became dramatically smaller because the economy took off and the government stayed
[Guest]: the same size.
[Guest]: It didn't get smaller, but it didn't get, you know, it didn't keep growing.
[Guest]: And it got out of doing many, many things.
[Guest]: Famously, in the 91, 96 period, there were whole government departments that were transferred
[Guest]: to the railways because the railways were seen as this huge employer.
[Guest]: And you know, what difference would a few more thousand people make?
[Guest]: So you know, when DGTD was closed, when MRTP was scrapped, there were many of those agencies
[Guest]: that were wholesale transferred and some of them were transferred even to the railways
[Guest]: simply because there was no other place to put them.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard of the CCA?
[Amit Varma]: Well, yes.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll relate this for my listeners very quickly anyway.
[Amit Varma]: No, but I don't know what happened with them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So basically, in 1984, this bureaucrat somewhere got an application from this department of
[Amit Varma]: the Tamil Nadu government asking for an increase in their budget.
[Amit Varma]: And this department was called CCA.
[Guest]: So he decided to look into...
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: I haven't heard of the CCA.
[Amit Varma]: You haven't heard of this one?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, okay.
[Amit Varma]: So this department was called the CCA.
[Amit Varma]: So he decided to look into it that they've asked for an increase in their budget.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's about 83, 84.
[Amit Varma]: And so what, you know, what is this department?
[Amit Varma]: So then he goes back into the history of it.
[Amit Varma]: And the history of it is this, that Winston Churchill used to be a fan of cigars, right?
[Amit Varma]: And then World War Two breaks out.
[Amit Varma]: And all his cigars, they were coming from Cuba, because of course, he's an aficionado
[Amit Varma]: and that's where the best cigars come from.
[Amit Varma]: But that trade route closes down because of World War Two and he can no longer get his
[Amit Varma]: cigars from there.
[Amit Varma]: Now, he's got to have his cigars because remember, he's saving the Western world.
[Amit Varma]: So what does he do?
[Amit Varma]: The second best cigars in the world apparently were a place near Chennai called...
[Amit Varma]: I've forgotten the name.
[Amit Varma]: It starts with T and it's a very long name.
[Amit Varma]: Apologies.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not dissing Tamilians, but Tiruchirappalli or something like that, right?
[Amit Varma]: So a department is set up in the colonial government of India to get those cigars across
[Amit Varma]: to him during the war.
[Amit Varma]: And the department is called CCA Churchill Cigar Assistant, right?
[Amit Varma]: So World War Two ends, India becomes independent, Churchill dies, and till 1984, this department
[Amit Varma]: is running.
[Amit Varma]: And then they actually have the audacity to apply for an increase in their budget.
[Amit Varma]: And this to me is sort of a classic illustration of how it is so hard to downsize the state.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, again, I'll quote from what you say about the 91 reforms and how they
[Amit Varma]: did actually, in a sense, downsize state, where you write, quote, I have long held the
[Amit Varma]: view that we should not seek better government, we should seek less government.
[Amit Varma]: That is my reading of the 1991 reforms.
[Amit Varma]: The state retreated from industrial licensing, control of foreign investment, public sector
[Amit Varma]: monopolies and everything from airlines to steel, and opened up to in imports.
[Amit Varma]: The resultant jump in growth multiplied our GDP eight times from 340 billion in 1991 to
[Amit Varma]: 2650 billion in 2017.
[Amit Varma]: It is only in the last four years that we have seen growth sag, and, stop quote, and
[Amit Varma]: so on.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, when we say less government, when I say less government, I'm thinking of
[Amit Varma]: the predatory state.
[Amit Varma]: If it feeds upon us less, we'll have more space and more energy to actually do things.
[Amit Varma]: People often represent it as, oh, who will look after the poor then, or we need the state
[Amit Varma]: or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But look at what the state is actually doing in the role that it plays in our lives.
[Amit Varma]: So the state in India is largely kind of predatory.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, for example, during COVID, you've written here about how your company was coping
[Amit Varma]: and you wrote, quote, we need passes for everything.
[Amit Varma]: We need a pass to bring people to work, a pass to source packing material, a pass to
[Amit Varma]: get the logistics providers in, another pass to get a truck in and on its way to the customer.
[Amit Varma]: Each takes time and is variably interpreted by each individual policeman, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And in episode 250 of the show, one of my friends was a small, you know, who runs a
[Amit Varma]: small factory in Narain, Chennai had also kind of spoken about this.
[Amit Varma]: And much as licensing went, we did some reforms in 91.
[Amit Varma]: But like in 2009, for example, I read about the Four Seasons Hotel opening in Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: where they needed 165 licenses to open, 165.
[Amit Varma]: And of which two were for different weighing machines, one for the kitchen and one for
[Amit Varma]: each room.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So there was still so many reforms pending.
[Amit Varma]: And I think just seeing the massive impact of the limited reforms, I think some of us
[Amit Varma]: started celebrating too soon.
[Amit Varma]: And there is still kind of so much work to be done.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about the fundamental reforms that 91 did not tackle.
[Guest]: Sure, so the 91 reforms, you know, that list covers what it did tackle.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And it's well known.
[Guest]: What were the areas that were the big areas that I think were untouched?
[Guest]: We did not touch education, right?
[Guest]: So huge area, if you ask me, both school and college education.
[Guest]: Now, you can make some argument that school is a, you know, a joint subject between both
[Guest]: union and states, so, you know, okay.
[Guest]: So it needed to take the states along.
[Guest]: But higher education is largely union, could have been addressed.
[Guest]: We did not address the role of technology and technology policy in 1991.
[Guest]: We did not address how bureaucrats are recruited, promoted, rewarded, given feedback, assessed.
[Guest]: Same mechanisms existed there.
[Guest]: And we did not really address the question of union state relations.
[Guest]: Some of that emerged a bit later on, but in somewhat fragmented ways.
[Guest]: Those are some of the bigger areas that we did not address.
[Guest]: One thing that we did address, of course, much later is the indirect tax system with
[Guest]: GST, right?
[Guest]: So that was not initially addressed, but came much later.
[Guest]: Another area that was not addressed was labor reform, which was, if you may remember that
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh spoke about it, as finance minister, it was called an exit policy.
[Guest]: It was a terribly named policy.
[Guest]: And the moment it was talked about, there was so much opposition from within the Congress
[Guest]: government itself that it was immediately killed.
[Guest]: And then it only came back actually under the current government in 2014.
[Guest]: And finally, you know, two years ago, we saw these 44 regulation labor laws get turned
[Guest]: into four labor laws.
[Guest]: A step in the right direction, but it's a step.
[Guest]: There's more still that needs to be done.
[Guest]: And then agriculture.
[Guest]: Agriculture has hardly been touched.
[Guest]: And the farm laws, in that sense, I think the farm laws were done wrong, and they were
[Guest]: done without institutional proprietories in place.
[Guest]: But the objective was right, and the direction of the laws were actually right for actually
[Guest]: helping agriculture in the country.
[Guest]: The other area is agricultural taxation, which everyone sees as this, you know, this complete
[Guest]: holy cow that you can't touch.
[Guest]: And I've never understood why.
[Guest]: Because I mean, you can at least start by saying that, listen, you know, let's tax agricultural
[Guest]: income.
[Guest]: Let's start at a high level.
[Guest]: Let's start at one crore a year, you know.
[Guest]: So tax agricultural incomes over one crore a year to begin with, you know, how can anyone
[Guest]: object to that?
[Amit Varma]: Couldn't agree with you more about the farm bills.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Ajay Shah and I did an episode called the tragedy of the farm bills, which is which
[Amit Varma]: I'll link again from the show notes, talking of the labor laws.
[Amit Varma]: Now remember, when the labor reforms happened a couple of years back, because they came
[Amit Varma]: from this government, which I oppose as much as anyone, but because they came from this
[Amit Varma]: government, there was a loud outcry against them from people who hadn't even thought about
[Amit Varma]: them or, you know, and they were all like, who will look after the rights of the workers
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, again, conflating intention with outcome, you know, which is the most
[Amit Varma]: common mistake people often make when thinking about policy and economics, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we mistake intention for outcome.
[Amit Varma]: And in this case, you might imagine all the labor laws, the intention is to help workers,
[Amit Varma]: but actually, they hurt workers much more, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And they hurt workers much more because it prevented that explosion in labor intensive
[Amit Varma]: manufacture would which would have taken India so much further ahead, you know, and that
[Amit Varma]: was a route China actually took.
[Amit Varma]: And now that China has, you know, elevated themselves so much, that kind of low cost
[Amit Varma]: work is actually, as you pointed out, shifting from China to places like Bangladesh and Vietnam,
[Amit Varma]: and we are still missing the boat.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this.
[Amit Varma]: Why is shifting to manufacturing jobs so important for an economy?
[Amit Varma]: What are the kind of different laws that ensure that it did not happen in India?
[Amit Varma]: And why are we still stuck?
[Amit Varma]: And is it too late?
[Guest]: So it, you know, first, the reason manufacturing is so important for all developing countries,
[Guest]: you know, is that it's the only high quality job that's available in abundance on mass
[Guest]: scale for people of low skills.
[Guest]: So that's the thing.
[Guest]: That's the single reason, right, that you have good quality jobs available on a mass
[Guest]: scale for people with low skills.
[Guest]: Now what do I mean by good quality job?
[Guest]: Good quality job is one where, which is higher productivity to start with, and where you
[Guest]: have the ability to keep raising productivity on a consistent basis.
[Guest]: And we know how to do that for manufacturing.
[Guest]: We've been learning more and more and more for 200 years how to keep improving productivity
[Guest]: in manufacturing.
[Guest]: So we know how to grow productivity in manufacturing in the long run.
[Guest]: And that makes manufacturing jobs a good quality kind of job.
[Guest]: Now what does it give you?
[Guest]: If you move people from, the archetype is you move people from sort of marginal productivity
[Guest]: in agriculture to employment in a factory, you get a jump, a massive jump in productivity.
[Guest]: I think the Indian multiple is 20.
[Guest]: So someone working in the modern manufacturing sector is 20 times more productive than the
[Guest]: average person working in agriculture.
[Guest]: So average agriculture, average in manufacturing.
[Guest]: It's a huge jump.
[Guest]: And then you have the ability to keep growing that productivity of the manufacturing job
[Guest]: going forward.
[Guest]: So you have the ability to keep raising incomes, et cetera, in that level.
[Guest]: Now we have 30 million manufacturing jobs in India.
[Guest]: But a workforce of 400 million.
[Guest]: It's a tiny number.
[Guest]: If you take Bangladesh, Bangladesh has many more, not in absolute terms, but they're much
[Guest]: smaller.
[Guest]: Their population of 200 million on our 1,400 million, they're one seventh our size.
[Guest]: They have manufacturing jobs.
[Guest]: Manufacturing is a much larger share of their workforce than it is for us.
[Guest]: And within that manufacturing workforce, many more women work because they have the specialization
[Guest]: in garment industry.
[Guest]: So 40% of their garment industry, 40% of their labor force is employed in the garment industry.
[Guest]: And a majority of them are women.
[Guest]: And as a result, Bangladesh has a much higher female labor force participation than we do.
[Guest]: We have the world's lowest female labor force participation ratio out of the top 20 economies,
[Guest]: the G20.
[Guest]: So for all those reasons, manufacturing makes a lot of sense for us.
[Guest]: Now what holds us back from having more manufacturing and labor-intensive manufacturing?
[Guest]: Decades if you like of legacy from the labor regulations and the way they were enforced.
[Guest]: For decades, if a case went to court, by and large, the decision would be in favor of labor,
[Guest]: by and large.
[Guest]: To close a factory, you needed permission from the government.
[Guest]: The government wouldn't give permission.
[Guest]: Instead, they would tell you that, listen, don't pay your electricity bill.
[Guest]: If you don't pay your electricity bill, they'll cut off the power.
[Guest]: When they cut off the power, then you can claim that since my power's been cut off,
[Guest]: I have to close.
[Guest]: I mean, you find all these weird sort of long way around, scratch my left ear with my right
[Guest]: hand kind of approaches.
[Guest]: And it was long pending.
[Guest]: And as a result, there was this mindset that developed in Indian industry that more labor
[Guest]: was bad.
[Guest]: And I think that mindset is still very strong.
[Guest]: It's still there in industry that we do not see employing more labor as the right thing
[Guest]: to do for our own growth going forward.
[Guest]: You see, you want to minimize the amount of labor that you employ.
[Guest]: It's exactly the contrary impulse that a country like ours needs.
[Guest]: So that mindset will take time to change.
[Guest]: How will it change?
[Guest]: It will change, as I say, these four labor laws that we've now seen is a good step forward.
[Guest]: But it's a step forward.
[Guest]: And we have to stick with them for a period of time and get people used to a new way of
[Guest]: working and then keep moving forward in the direction of labor reform for a long period
[Guest]: of time before it will start showing up in people starting to say, listen, employing
[Guest]: a lot of labor is a good way to do business in the country.
[Guest]: There's a second thing that we can do.
[Guest]: I think we should actively seek some of the big labor intensive manufacturers to set up
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: I think the work that's been done to get Foxconn to come into India is a very sensible thing.
[Guest]: Because they're highly labor intensive.
[Guest]: They employ largest factory in China.
[Guest]: I talk about as 400,000 people working in it, one factory making iPhones.
[Guest]: We need those kinds of factories in India.
[Guest]: Lee and Fung, they employ hundreds of thousands of people in China making garments.
[Guest]: We need to find ways in which we can attract them to set up these large plants in India
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: And then maybe with the power of a few of those examples, more Indian industrialists
[Guest]: will start saying, listen, yes, a way in which I can progress, I can set up an enterprise
[Guest]: that can be highly successful that's very labor intensive.
[Guest]: And then labor intensive manufacturing can start becoming an attractive option.
[Guest]: We have everything that it takes, I think, but the mindset will need to shift very substantially
[Guest]: because we have to make up for 50 years of history, literally 50 years of history.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And adding to all those legacy labor laws, which this incentivize companies from growing
[Amit Varma]: too big, because you don't want to hire too many people.
[Amit Varma]: Adding to that were also a whole bunch of other laws, like, for example, you still aren't
[Amit Varma]: allowed to sell agricultural land for non agricultural purposes.
[Amit Varma]: So a typical move away where one farming gets much more productive, and then many farms
[Amit Varma]: which are struggling to kind of get by, you sell the land, factories are set up, and those
[Amit Varma]: factories employ many people.
[Amit Varma]: And that's how economies grow, like everywhere else in the world, the agriculture will perhaps
[Amit Varma]: employ, you know, employ five to 6% of people in developed countries like the US and India.
[Amit Varma]: It's, you know, hovering somewhere between 40 to 60 exact figures are hard to come by
[Amit Varma]: because informal sector and all that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: 120 million.
[Guest]: And we don't need 120 million people in agriculture.
[Guest]: We don't.
[Guest]: And in fact, you know, after the, during the pandemic, with the reverse migration that
[Guest]: took place, 10 million people moved into agriculture, we grew our agricultural labor force.
[Guest]: I mean, CMI shows that the agricultural number of people employed in agriculture grew.
[Guest]: That's a damning statement for a country like ours.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember in an election a while back, I don't remember which election, but Yogendra
[Amit Varma]: Yadav made a statement to the effect of that, you know, if farmers have to go and join factories,
[Amit Varma]: I'm telling you, I will not allow it, which is such a bizarre way of thinking because
[Guest]: you're romanticizing a life which is nasty, brutish and short, as Hobbes would have said.
[Amit Varma]: And you are denying them that path to progress, like, you know, when people talk about how
[Amit Varma]: tough factory jobs are, or, oh, this is a sweatshop, or, oh, what is the labor here?
[Amit Varma]: The point that they're forgetting is that the people who voluntarily take up those jobs
[Amit Varma]: are taking it up because it is the best option open to them.
[Amit Varma]: And you close that option off, they are getting into something much worse.
[Guest]: I mean, exactly.
[Guest]: And, you know, and it's actually not getting into something, they're coming from something
[Guest]: much worse.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: They're coming from something much worse.
[Guest]: And, you know, and by, I mean, we may have all of these, I can understand, you have all
[Guest]: these principled ideas about, you know, we must have really safe working, yes, we must
[Guest]: really look after everyone in factories, all of that, yes.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I understand the instinct.
[Guest]: But give people the choice, let people, give people the choice to move out of agriculture
[Guest]: into jobs in factories, even if they aren't the kind of jobs that we see as being desirable
[Guest]: and high quality and, you know, of somehow of, you know, that would have all of the support
[Guest]: mechanisms that we would like to see as being a civilized kind of employment, you know,
[Guest]: give people those options, people in Bangladesh have that option, our people should have it
[Amit Varma]: too.
[Amit Varma]: You're mentioning Bangladesh.
[Amit Varma]: I remember this study by Oxfam many years ago, where, you know, they wrote about how
[Amit Varma]: international outrage forced factories to lay off 30,000 child workers, right?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, child labor is horrible.
[Amit Varma]: But what happened, many of those kids starved to death, many became prostitutes.
[Amit Varma]: And a similar study in 1995, UNICEF studied how an international boycott of carpets made
[Amit Varma]: in Nepal, again by child labor, led to between 5,000 to 7,000 Nepali girls turning to prostitution
[Amit Varma]: because a better option was denied to them.
[Guest]: So I mean, you know, and, you know, I don't think either of us is trying to make an argument
[Guest]: in favor of child labor, you know, or sweatshops, or any of that.
[Guest]: But I'm just saying that, you know, it's you have to look at where people are coming from.
[Guest]: And you know, let people get into these new jobs.
[Guest]: And when they get into these new factory jobs, then also in Bangladesh, what have we seen
[Guest]: in the last 10 years, we've seen the safety levels improve dramatically.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because of demanding buyers that say, hey, listen, you know, you can't buy your garments
[Guest]: from factories where people are, you know, where they may die in a fire, if a small fire
[Guest]: breaks out, and it spreads through the whole building, and they don't have safe exits,
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Get things sorted out.
[Guest]: And people have been getting them sorted out.
[Amit Varma]: So it's the jobs are improving in quality.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Like in China as well, where, you know, they've climbed so far of the value chain that a lot
[Amit Varma]: of these are now leaving and going to Bangladesh and Vietnam, and we are still behind and yes,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: One of the truly thought provoking parts of your book, which made me I mean, all of it
[Amit Varma]: is thought provoking, but a lot of it I'm familiar with.
[Amit Varma]: But a part that I was that made me think for the first time, was sort of the way you define
[Amit Varma]: modernity and the role of the factory in it.
[Amit Varma]: So at one point, you write, quote, as a society modernizes, people adopt more modern attitudes.
[Amit Varma]: These include a sense of personal efficacy, openness to new experience, respect for science
[Amit Varma]: and technology, acceptance of the need for strict scheduling of time, and a positive
[Amit Varma]: orientation towards planning ahead, stop quote, and all things that you can, you know, get
[Amit Varma]: from a productivity video on YouTube from Ali Abdaal or Thomas Frank.
[Amit Varma]: And then you quote Alex Inkels, his book Becoming Modern, where he points out that the two key
[Amit Varma]: sources of modernity are the school and the factory.
[Amit Varma]: Now the school everyone can understand, tell me about the role of the factory in this.
[Guest]: So the factory, the reason, you know, Alex did this study in six countries in the 60s,
[Guest]: one of the countries being India, and one of them being actually at that time, East
[Guest]: Pakistan or Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And when he did that study, he put the scale together as a kind of universal scale of modernity.
[Guest]: And that was his argument.
[Guest]: And then looked at all those attributes, and he showed how people who'd been to school
[Guest]: and been to school for a certain number of years moved more up that scale, and people
[Guest]: who worked in a factory move more up that scale.
[Guest]: So why a factory?
[Guest]: Why is the factory a school for modernity?
[Guest]: It's a school for modernity because, you know, if you think of it, you come to work from
[Guest]: time A to time B. So you work to a schedule.
[Guest]: You learn that if you follow a particular process, you can be more productive.
[Guest]: If you can be more productive, then you can earn more as a result.
[Guest]: Third, if you use tools, technology, you can be more productive again, or it involves less
[Guest]: physical labor.
[Guest]: So you start gaining a respect for technology and science and so on.
[Guest]: Fourth, you learn to believe in your own ability to deliver your own destiny instead of someone
[Guest]: making your destiny for you, in that if you do a good job and you produce something that's
[Guest]: better, you see the results that flow as a result of that.
[Guest]: That starts teaching the sense of efficacy and control that you have over your own destiny
[Guest]: and outcomes, instead of saying it's fate, instead of saying it's someone else who's
[Guest]: going to determine what happens to you.
[Guest]: So all those reasons, you start learning these modern attitudes in a factory.
[Guest]: I've always found that very convincing from the time that I first read it years ago.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, another interesting sort of thought provoking bit was where you write
[Amit Varma]: quote, a thought provoking edit by TN Ninan in the Business Standard many years ago on
[Amit Varma]: the horrendous Nirbhaya rape has always haunted me.
[Amit Varma]: He pointed out how different the victim and rapists were in the paths of modernity.
[Amit Varma]: The victim and a friend were educated with good job prospects and formal occupations.
[Amit Varma]: The rapists were all in informal, unstable occupations with nothing that either taught
[Amit Varma]: them modern attitudes or gave them a stake in the existing system.
[Amit Varma]: The difference was not where the victims and rapists had come from, but in the education
[Amit Varma]: exposure and employment of their families, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, something that I've been saying for many years, and I discovered through your
[Amit Varma]: book much to my dismay that Manmohan Singh has a quote that says exactly the same thing
[Amit Varma]: is that India lives in many centuries at once.
[Amit Varma]: And this is sort of a sort of a heartbreaking sort of instance of that, where an instance
[Amit Varma]: of you know, the seen and the unseen, you know, it's it's kind of heartbreaking.
[Amit Varma]: You've spoken about why manufacturing jobs matter more than services jobs, a bunch of
[Amit Varma]: different reasons.
[Amit Varma]: But you've also interestingly spoken about tourism, about how tourism can one be an industry
[Amit Varma]: that booms in India.
[Unknown]: And of course, we, you know, we have the raw material for it, which is the beauty and the
[Amit Varma]: culture and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And two, why it can also be a significant modernizing influence.
[Guest]: So tell me a bit about that and that opportunity.
[Guest]: So you know, if you look around at where I mean, I have I talk about this particular
[Guest]: resort Shillam between Bombay and Pune.
[Guest]: And Shillam is in this very rural area.
[Guest]: They've employed people from not by the thousand, but by the hundred from all the villages.
[Guest]: They're very systematically, consciously recruited locally.
[Guest]: And they've taught all of these girls and boys who've come from the villages how to
[Guest]: behave with guests at a resort, you know.
[Guest]: So they, and they just, they've learned, they've learned all kinds of things.
[Guest]: They've learned hygiene, they've learned politeness, they've learned communication, they've learned
[Guest]: dress, they've learned how to organize themselves, how to follow a schedule, you know.
[Guest]: And their lives, the lives of them, their families have been transformed in these villages.
[Guest]: The villages are becoming, I mean, I've been to Shillam maybe five or six times over 10
[Guest]: years.
[Guest]: And each time you go, you see that the villages that you go, that you drive through on the
[Guest]: way to Shillam are getting more prosperous.
[Guest]: There are now some shops that are opening up.
[Guest]: The shops mean that people not only are selling things, but someone's buying them, you know.
[Guest]: People have money to buy things and so on.
[Guest]: And it's, you see, you see that transformative influence of people who are starting to get
[Guest]: more modern.
[Guest]: And the great thing is that they have jobs locally.
[Guest]: They have jobs where they live in the villages.
[Guest]: It doesn't mean that they have to all move to Pune or Bombay to get these modern jobs.
[Guest]: They're getting their jobs, these good jobs right there.
[Guest]: So that's the power that we have of tourism.
[Guest]: I mean, we need a thousand Shillams all around the country.
[Amit Varma]: And we have many more than that.
[Amit Varma]: Like I remember many, like when we think of the typical tourist destinations in India,
[Amit Varma]: it'll be like Kashmir in an erstwhile age, you know, Kerala, Rajasthan, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But in 2003, when the tsunami struck, I remember I went with a relief team.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also live blogging while I was doing that.
[Amit Varma]: And I traveled down the coast of Tamil Nadu.
[Amit Varma]: And at one hand, obviously, it's like a nightmare.
[Amit Varma]: It's just horrible.
[Amit Varma]: But later, when I thought about it in retrospect, I also realized that around those scenes of
[Amit Varma]: devastation, there was great natural beauty.
[Amit Varma]: Like I'm not kidding.
[Amit Varma]: I've vacationed in Sri Lanka and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Tamil Nadu has equal natural beauty, if not more.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's just absolutely gorgeous.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact that we don't even think about it in terms of tourism and all that is a shame.
[Guest]: And the Karnataka coast, I mean, if you, you know, the drive, I mean, the drive from Bombay
[Guest]: to Goa is nice.
[Guest]: The drive from Goa to Mangalore is spectacular.
[Guest]: Wow, must make it.
[Guest]: It is just spectacular.
[Guest]: And you know, and it's just, and this, I mean, you just go in any direction.
[Guest]: And there's so much to do and see.
[Guest]: And, you know, I mean, we're country number, whatever, 20-something in the world tourism
[Guest]: rankings.
[Guest]: You know, country number one is France with 85 million tourists a year.
[Guest]: OK, all these numbers are pre-pandemic, yeah?
[Guest]: Now, 85 million tourists is a lot for a country of, what, 60 million people, right?
[Guest]: Less than 60 million people, population of less than 60 million.
[Guest]: We have 1.4 billion people.
[Guest]: We can get tourists from all over the world.
[Guest]: But we also need to get rid of some of our hangups.
[Guest]: You know, we have these hangups that we all want people who, tourists who will come and
[Guest]: stay at the Taj.
[Guest]: Yeah, great.
[Guest]: But that's a small number.
[Guest]: We need people who will come and stay in four-star hotels and three-star hotels by the million.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we want budget tourists.
[Guest]: We want African tourists.
[Guest]: We want Asian tourists.
[Guest]: Exactly, exactly, exactly.
[Guest]: We don't only want Europeans and Americans.
[Guest]: We want people from all over the world.
[Guest]: And I mean, you look at, OK, China is in a different place today because of the pandemic
[Guest]: and its handling of the pandemic, where there are no Chinese tourists, which makes it attractive
[Guest]: for anyone else to travel anywhere else in the world, by the way.
[Guest]: But Chinese tourists have been a huge growth engine for most of Asia, for Japan, for South
[Guest]: Korea, for Thailand, for the Philippines, for all of, almost all of Asia, but not for
[Guest]: India.
[Amit Varma]: Missed opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: Huge missed opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: So we have about like 20 minutes left.
[Amit Varma]: There's so much to talk about your book anyway, even if we spoke for another three hours,
[Amit Varma]: I don't think we'd cover it because it's just so rich in ideas and things to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: I'll come straight away to what you call your three pillars of, you know, where India needs
[Amit Varma]: to go.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, putting this together, the government and policy environment is one of the three
[Amit Varma]: pillars of leadership and inclusive, international, innovative and independent industry is a second.
[Amit Varma]: Independent and effective institutions make up the third.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, we've spoken a bit about the government and policy environment.
[Amit Varma]: I also, let's talk about industry, where you point out how these four factors, inclusive,
[Amit Varma]: international, innovative, independent, all of these are kind of important.
[Amit Varma]: So I want you to briefly tell me a little bit about this and how you're thinking on
[Amit Varma]: this evolve being an industry leader yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And also the broader question I have to ask is that you've set out this vision where industry
[Amit Varma]: can move in all these fantastic, beautiful directions.
[Amit Varma]: Now my sense is that people are driven by self-interest, by incentives, right?
[Amit Varma]: People respond to incentives and they will behave accordingly, therefore.
[Amit Varma]: And where are those incentives coming from?
[Amit Varma]: They can come from policy frameworks around them, they can come from the culture around
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: And if companies don't behave in say, ABC way already, you know, what would make them
[Amit Varma]: behave your way?
[Amit Varma]: Now, it's one thing that there might be enlightened leadership in some companies like yours, where
[Amit Varma]: you decide that this is a path we are going to take, we are going to be more inclusive,
[Amit Varma]: we are going to, you know, blah, blah, blah, we are going to, you know, instead of running
[Amit Varma]: from competition, we're going to go towards it like you decided in 91 and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, this question kind of struck with me that every industrialist will do what
[Amit Varma]: is in her self-interest at a given point in time, that's determined by the incentives
[Amit Varma]: from the environment around you.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't see those incentives around either in policy or in culture that will make them
[Guest]: move in these directions.
[Guest]: So let's take the four I's.
[Guest]: So the inclusive thing that I talk about the, you know, if industry needing to be more inclusive,
[Guest]: I think will come largely through voluntary effort.
[Guest]: It's difficult to change the policy framework to make Indian industry, you know, consciously
[Guest]: more inclusive.
[Guest]: One exception, which I'll come to in a sec, but by and large, it'll come from the CS,
[Guest]: what I'm advocating is that from the CSR budgets of firms, focus the CSR budgets of firms on
[Guest]: education, as it is education is the largest single item.
[Guest]: In education, focus it on Karthik Muralidharan's idea, which is also in the new education policy
[Guest]: of second standard outcomes.
[Guest]: And if we can do that one thing as one big thing for all the schools that we in industry
[Guest]: work with in any case, then we can transform the lives of millions of children each year.
[Guest]: We can improve school outcomes for millions of children each year and therefore include
[Guest]: millions more people each year in our growth process.
[Guest]: That's one part of inclusion.
[Guest]: The second part of inclusion, by the way, where we can, you know, the economist Gary
[Guest]: Becker did a lot of work on discrimination theory many years ago.
[Guest]: And his argument was that actually the first firms that move away from discrimination win.
[Guest]: And if they can win very visibly and clearly economically, then in an incredibly short
[Guest]: period of time, discrimination falls away.
[Guest]: So the more we can get firms in India to see 1.4 billion people as the population from
[Guest]: which to recruit, the more we will move in that direction.
[Guest]: So we have to make inclusion and non-discriminatory employment, employing more women, employing
[Guest]: more minorities, employing people from other geographies.
[Guest]: We have to make that a really powerful business case.
[Guest]: And when we make that a really powerful business case, I think it will flip quite fast.
[Guest]: So now, how do we get that to happen?
[Guest]: What do we need to do?
[Guest]: I think it's examples, visibility, it'll take some time, but I think we have to move in
[Guest]: that direction.
[Guest]: Saatchi and Saatchi.
[Guest]: I agree.
[Guest]: I mean, I really think there's a lot to be said for getting some of these messages across
[Guest]: in a very coherent, powerful way.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's a study I like citing which shows that the most important factor in decision
[Amit Varma]: making in any group, within a firm, in government or whatever, the most important factor is
[Amit Varma]: not education or intelligence or whatever, it is diversity, that you have a diverse group
[Amit Varma]: of people, you have the best decisions being made, added to what you pointed out, Becker's
[Amit Varma]: study that, you know, you stop discriminating, you immediately, you have a competitive advantage.
[Guest]: You know, in one of the run-up to one of the British elections, I was in the UK at that
[Guest]: time, and I remember seeing a billboard that said, it was a very unfair billboard.
[Guest]: It was from the Conservative Party, Margaret Thatcher's party, saying, it said, Labour
[Guest]: says he's black.
[Guest]: We say he's British.
[Guest]: Completely unfair, but incredibly powerful communication, if you think of it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, if you just think of the, you know, and it was a powerful argument against discrimination
[Guest]: in an interesting, somewhat, what would you call it, very deceitful way, but it was a
[Guest]: very powerful way.
[Guest]: I come to the other two, next two I's.
[Guest]: Next two I's are international and innovative.
[Guest]: For international, I think it's a, there's a clear policy role, which is open the economy
[Guest]: up before industry says it's ready to be opened up.
[Guest]: So allow imports as the best way of fostering exports.
[Guest]: Because as an economist would say, a tax on imports is a tax on exports.
[Guest]: So if you really want to see exports boom, bring down import tariffs.
[Guest]: And we have an opportunity just now.
[Guest]: The rupee is under some pressure.
[Guest]: The RBI should not try to protect the rupee.
[Guest]: It can protect a disorderly devaluation.
[Guest]: But beyond that, it should let the rupee devalue.
[Guest]: And use that devaluation as a way of then reducing tariffs on imported goods.
[Guest]: That's for the finance ministry to do, or commerce ministry to do.
[Guest]: So because that's a way of forcing Indian industry to be much more international.
[Guest]: And from the industry side, we can help in that from CI, we can make it easier for firms
[Guest]: to go overseas, to invest in different countries, enter new markets, and so on.
[Guest]: On the innovation side, I've really wrestled with this question of why Indian industry
[Guest]: invests as little as it does in in-house R&D.
[Guest]: I don't think that's a policy point.
[Guest]: I think that's very much of an industry point.
[Guest]: I think it's for industry to fix on its own.
[Guest]: We need to do some very visible benchmarking, where for different industries, and that's
[Guest]: what we're trying to do now actually in CI, where for different industries, how much is
[Guest]: invested in R&D versus the top firms in the industry worldwide?
[Guest]: How many people are employed in R&D?
[Guest]: What kind of qualifications do they have?
[Guest]: What are the outcomes that they have in terms of new products and services that are introduced
[Guest]: and so on?
[Guest]: And I think through some of that benchmarking, if we start realizing that we actually do
[Guest]: invest very little in R&D, and that awareness grows, then hopefully we'll start to see that
[Guest]: change.
[Guest]: I think that's a problem for industry to largely fix on its own, and industry associations
[Guest]: like CI can play a key role.
[Guest]: There's a second element to the innovation piece, which is a policy role, which is where
[Guest]: public research and public R&D is done.
[Guest]: It should be done within the higher education system instead of in autonomous R&D labs.
[Guest]: That will improve the quality of the people coming out of the higher education system,
[Guest]: which will help in-house R&D hugely.
[Guest]: Last point on independence.
[Guest]: I believe very much that our lack of speaking out, and the quote that you read earlier on,
[Guest]: that the lack of speaking out is a reflection of decades of license rudge.
[Guest]: And that mindset where we would keep going to the government for things, for licenses,
[Guest]: for favors here, for incentives there, that mindset lives on.
[Guest]: Even though the policy framework has largely changed since 1991.
[Guest]: And we have to shed that mindset of going to the government and constantly asking for.
[Guest]: I think that, unfortunately, will take the longest time to change.
[Guest]: And I don't think we should wait for the government to be welcoming of criticism and input.
[Guest]: It's for industry to make the change.
[Guest]: If a hundred industrialists are independent and critical in speaking out, we're there.
[Amit Varma]: But are they?
[Amit Varma]: Are you an outlier?
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Guest]: I think we're too few.
[Guest]: Too few?
[Guest]: Far too few.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, you have people.
[Guest]: Why is it that people like Rahul Bajaj have been, I think, justifiably revered by all
[Guest]: of us?
[Guest]: It's because there's so much of an exception, or Kiran Mazumdar.
[Amit Varma]: There was a time where, you know, people like Ashok Desai and Montek Singh Ahluwalia and
[Amit Varma]: all these people were also exceptions, you know, before the tide turned and today we
[Amit Varma]: think of them as heroes.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, there's something to be hopeful about.
[Amit Varma]: My penultimate question.
[Amit Varma]: At one point you write, quote, seeing our government up close left me both impressed
[Amit Varma]: and depressed.
[Amit Varma]: I was impressed by the intelligence, commitment and hard work of many of our past and present
[Amit Varma]: ministers and senior bureaucrats.
[Amit Varma]: I was depressed by how unprepared, unmindful of international best practice, diverted by
[Amit Varma]: optics over content and petty some of these great minds were, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And my question is there that how receptive are people to these ideas at three different
[Amit Varma]: levels?
[Amit Varma]: One is the level of government when you speak to policymakers and people who can actually
[Amit Varma]: make decisions.
[Amit Varma]: Two, at the level of your peers within the industry, which I think you've already answered,
[Amit Varma]: you've said too few.
[Amit Varma]: And three, at the level of the larger public, because, you know, these ideas need to be
[Amit Varma]: part of the discourse and sadly they are not.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, across these three, you know, what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: So in the government, there are people who are receptive.
[Guest]: And I give the story of a minister who after I'd written an article criticizing us dropping
[Guest]: out of the RCEP negotiations, and I met him in a completely unrelated context two days
[Guest]: later or something.
[Guest]: And he said, he started by saying, I really liked your article.
[Guest]: And he says, I would have phoned you to tell you, but I'm a loyal member of the government.
[Guest]: So I did.
[Guest]: But I mean, you know, so and I think there is this voice.
[Guest]: There are these reformers within government who today, you know, among some ministers,
[Guest]: some bureaucrats who want to do the right things.
[Guest]: And I think their hand is strengthened if we speak out, whether in industry or whether
[Guest]: in civil society, but certainly in industry.
[Guest]: And so I think we strengthen reformers' hands when we're more independent.
[Guest]: Shifting the Overton window, as it were.
[Guest]: I think so.
[Guest]: And I think it helps a great deal to do that.
[Guest]: And by the way, I know several people in senior bureaucrats who have been very receptive.
[Guest]: Some have read my book and have sent me nice messages.
[Guest]: Some ministers and bureaucrats who have sent the book to have not heard from at all.
[Guest]: So I don't know whether they've read it and didn't like it at all or whether they haven't
[Guest]: read it yet.
[Guest]: But my guess is it's the second, but I don't know.
[Guest]: I'll find out at some point.
[Guest]: On your third category, on sort of the public at large, you're right.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, what I would love is that these kinds of questions on the role of the
[Guest]: state, on the role of trade and an open trade policy, on the role of labor, labor laws and
[Guest]: reform in building a more inclusive society and encouraging more women to work.
[Guest]: On why we invest what we do in R&D and how we could do much more and better with it.
[Guest]: On institutional independence and, you know, on the role of dissent and criticism.
[Guest]: I really wish these kinds of questions were really seriously discussed and debated to
[Guest]: a much greater extent, which is why I really appreciate this conversation, because it's
[Guest]: so important for us.
[Guest]: And I, you know, I want people to read my book, not to agree with it.
[Guest]: I don't mind if they don't agree, but I don't mind if they disagree with everything that
[Guest]: I say.
[Guest]: But if they engage with these issues, I would be delighted.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we need to talk more.
[Amit Varma]: So my final question is, you know, and this is a common end for my episodes where I ask
[Amit Varma]: my guests to recommend books or films or music that they absolutely love that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they take with them to a desert island.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned in your book that one of your top five favorite books is Exit, Voice and
[Amit Varma]: Loyalty by Hirschman, which I love as well.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned during this conversation that Leave it to Smith is one of your top five
[Amit Varma]: books as well.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I don't know how many books that are in your top five, could be 15, could be 20.
[Guest]: There are only five in my top five, but there are many close.
[Amit Varma]: So give me the other three and then tell us about the close ones.
[Guest]: And if you also want to talk about music and films, why not let's discover new things.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So, India After Gandhi by Ram Chandra Guha is, I think, one of the great books of all
[Guest]: time, one of the great histories, and it's wonderfully written.
[Guest]: Many of Ram's books, you know, I mean, I think all of his books are worth reading and really
[Guest]: great.
[Guest]: But India After Gandhi is, to me, one of the great books for me of all time.
[Guest]: The Wealth and Poverty of Nations by David Landis, I think, is a great economic history
[Guest]: of the world and how the world got to be where it is, highly opinionated, quite amusing in
[Guest]: different times, a good read.
[Guest]: So it's a good book to read.
[Guest]: It's a nice story, very opinionated, not balanced, but a good read.
[Guest]: And then a little book by Alan Bennett called The Uncommon Reader, which is very funny.
[Guest]: It's 100 pages.
[Guest]: It's very funny.
[Guest]: It's a great book for anyone who loves to read.
[Guest]: And it's about the Queen of England becoming a great reader.
[Guest]: That's why The Uncommon Reader.
[Guest]: And, you know, how she gets hooked on to reading and what happens.
[Guest]: And she starts reading first, you know, and she has the sense of duty.
[Guest]: So if she opens a book, she has to finish it.
[Guest]: Even books she doesn't enjoy, and then she starts reading more and more and she becomes
[Unknown]: a great reader.
[Guest]: So, I mean, it's a very amusing book.
[Guest]: Those are the five.
[Guest]: So very different, two fiction, three nonfiction.
[Guest]: The ones that came very, there are also others that came very close, John Stuart Mill's On
[Guest]: Liberty.
[Guest]: It's a, I think, difficult book to read.
[Guest]: It's, you know, it's 1850s prose at the end of the day, but the content is terrific.
[Guest]: And it's a statement of liberalism like no other and the essence of what it is to really
[Guest]: be free and why policy needs to keep in mind always how policies might infringe on one's
[Guest]: individual liberty.
[Guest]: There are many, many other books that I could come to.
[Guest]: But anyway, those are the ones that there are.
[Guest]: There are many others.
[Guest]: There are others that Ram has written and, you know, his collections of essays like Patriots
[Guest]: and Partisans and Democrats and Dissenters are also wonderful, I think, collections.
[Guest]: And the whole of P.G.
[Guest]: Stuart House, all 97 titles, but especially the Blanding series, the Jeeves series, the
[Guest]: Smith series, the Uncle Fred series.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, these are.
[Amit Varma]: My childhood has come flooding back of lying in my bed in the summer afternoon, reading
[Guest]: these paperbacks one by one.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, what I've recently discovered is Everyman.
[Guest]: So Everyman is this these nice hardback editions of many classic books, and they've republished
[Guest]: all the P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse books on really good quality paper in caslon type, really nicely produced.
[Guest]: And I'm sort of enjoying reading these nice physically produced book, P.G.
[Guest]: Woodhouse's again.
[Amit Varma]: I have an Everyman edition of George Orwell's collected essays, which I really love.
[Amit Varma]: It's like a treasure.
[Guest]: I keep dipping into it because he's such a good writer.
[Guest]: So you take George, you know, the other ones have been in the top 10, by the way.
[Guest]: So 1984 would be in there.
[Guest]: Homage to Catalonia probably would not be, even though I think it is a great book.
[Guest]: And maybe another Albert Hirschman, The Passions and the Interests would be in there.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't read that.
[Guest]: So what about music, films, anything?
[Guest]: So music, films, very easy.
[Guest]: I mean, I mainly listen to Western classical.
[Guest]: And I started, I used to listen to a very wide range of Western classical.
[Guest]: And as I've got older, I've got narrower.
[Guest]: And I largely now listen to sort of Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms, Schubert, Schumann, those
[Guest]: five Chopin, maybe six composers, heavy emphasis on piano music, some orchestral music, some
[Guest]: favorite works.
[Guest]: So the Brahms second piano concerto, the Beethoven fourth and fifth piano concertos, the Beethoven,
[Guest]: well, the fourth, sixth, ninth symphonies.
[Guest]: I mean, there are the Schubert impromptus, there are many, the Mozart, almost all the
[Guest]: piano concertos.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a stack that one could go with the Beethoven triple concerto.
[Guest]: These are all wonderful works to listen to.
[Guest]: And you can, I keep hearing them again and again and again.
[Guest]: On film, my favorite movie of all time is, I like light films.
[Guest]: I like comedies more than anything else.
[Guest]: My favorite film is a movie called The Philadelphia Story.
[Guest]: And my favorite actor and actress have tended to be Cary Grant and Catherine Hepburn, and
[Guest]: they're both in it together.
[Guest]: And then there are many others apart from Philadelphia Story, there's Casablanca, which
[Guest]: is not a comedy, but it's quite funny as well, with Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall.
[Guest]: And there's a bunch of others.
[Guest]: Most Cary Grant movies, most of the Catherine Hepburn, Spencer Tracy films.
[Guest]: So quite a few.
[Guest]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: Noshad, thank you so much for coming on this show, writing such a thought provoking book
[Amit Varma]: and sort of filling the air around me with positivity.
[Guest]: I think at least today, I'll be a little less of a pessimist just because I had this conversation
[Guest]: with you.
[Guest]: So thank you.
[Guest]: Okay, great.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: Wonderful, wonderful to have the conversation.
[Guest]: Thank you very much.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes, enter rabbit holes
[Amit Varma]: at will, visit your nearest bookstore online or offline and pick up The Struggle and the
[Amit Varma]: Promise Restoring India's Potential by Noshad Forbes.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Noshad on Twitter at NoshadF.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.